Pierre Teilhard de Chardin SJ ; May 1, 1881 -- April 10, 1955was a French philosopher and Jesuit priest who trained as a paleontologist and geologist and took part in the discovery of Peking Man. 
He conceived the idea of the Omega Point a maximum level of complexity and consciousness towards which he believed the Universe was evolvingand developed Vladimir Vernadsky's concept of noosphere. 
Many of Teilhard's writings were censored by the Catholic Church during his lifetime because of his views on original sin. 
However, in July 2009, Vatican spokesman Fr. 
Federico Lombardi said: ``By now, no one would dream of saying that is a heterodox author who shouldn't be studied.'' 
and he has been praised by Pope Benedict XVI. 
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin was born in the Château of Sarcenat at Orcines, close to Clermont-Ferrand, France, on May 1, 1881. 
On the Teilhard side he is descended from an ancient family of magistrates from Auvergne originating in Murat, Cantal, and on the de Chardin side he is descended from a family that was ennobled under Louis XVIII. 
He was the fourth of eleven children. 
His father, Emmanuel Teilhard 1844--1932, an amateur naturalist, collected stones, insects and plants and promoted the observation of nature in the household. 
Pierre Teilhard's spirituality was awakened by his mother, Berthe de Dompiere. 
When he was 12, he went to the Jesuit college of Mongré, in Villefranche-sur-Saône, where he completed baccalaureates of philosophy and mathematics. 
Then, in 1899, he entered the Jesuit novitiate at Aix-en-Provence, where he began a philosophical, theological and spiritual career. 
As of the summer 1901, the Waldeck-Rousseau laws, which submitted congregational associations' properties to state control, prompted some of the Jesuits to exile themselves in the United Kingdom. 
Young Jesuit students continued their studies in Jersey. 
In the meantime, Teilhard earned a licentiate in literature in Caen in 1902. 
From 1905 to 1908, he taught physics and chemistry in Cairo, Egypt, at the Jesuit College of the Holy Family. 
He wrote ''... it is the dazzling of the East foreseen and drunk greedily ... in its lights, its vegetation, its fauna and its deserts.'' 
``Letters from Egypt'' 1905--1908-- ''Éditions Aubier''Teilhard studied theology in Hastings, in Sussex United Kingdom, from 1908 to 1912. 
There he synthesized his scientific, philosophical and theological knowledge in the light of evolution. 
His reading of ``L'Évolution Créatrice'' The Creative Evolutionby Henri Bergson was, he said, the ``catalyst of a fire which devoured already its heart and its spirit.'' 
His views on evolution and religion particularly inspired the evolutionary biologist Theodosius Dobzhansky. 
Teilhard was ordained a priest on August 24, 1911, at age 30. 
From 1912 to 1914, Teilhard worked in the paleontology laboratory of the ``Museum National d'Histoire Naturelle'', in Paris, studying the mammals of the middle Tertiary period. 
Later he studied elsewhere in Europe. 
In June 1912 he formed part of the original digging team, with Arthur Smith Woodward and Charles Dawson, to perform follow-up investigations at the Piltdown site, after the discovery of the first fragments of the fraudulent``Piltdown Man'', with some even suggesting he participated in the hoax. 
Professor Marcellin Boule specialist in Neanderthal studies, who so early as 1915 astutely recognised the non-hominid origins of the Piltdown finds, gradually guided Teilhard towards human paleontology. 
At the museum's Institute of Human Paleontology, he became a friend of Henri Breuil and took part with him, in 1913, in excavations in the prehistoric painted caves in the northwest of Spain, at the Cave of Castillo. 
Mobilised in December 1914, Teilhard served in World War I as a stretcher-bearer in the 8th Moroccan Rifles. 
For his valour, he received several citations including the Médaille militaire and the Legion of Honour. 
Throughout these years of war he developed his reflections in his diaries and in letters to his cousin, Marguerite Teillard-Chambon, who later edited them into a book: ``Genèse d'une pensée'' ``Genesis of a thought''. 
He confessed later: ''...the war was a meeting ... with the Absolute.'' 
In 1916, he wrote his first essay: ``La Vie Cosmique'' ``Cosmic life'', where his scientific and philosophical thought was revealed just as his mystical life. 
He pronounced his solemn vows as a Jesuit in Sainte-Foy-lès-Lyon, on May 26, 1918, during a leave. 
In August 1919, in Jersey, he would write ``Puissance spirituelle de la Matière'' ``the spiritual Power of Matter''. 
The complete essays written between 1916 and 1919 are published under the following titles: Teilhard followed at the Sorbonne three unit degrees of natural science: geology, botany and zoology. 
His thesis treated of the mammals of the French lower Eocene and their stratigraphy. 
After 1920, he lectured in geology at the Catholic Institute of Paris, then became an assistant professor after being granted a science doctorate in 1922. 
In 1923 he traveled to China with Father Emile Licent, who was in charge in Tianjin of a significant laboratory collaboration between the Natural History Museum in Paris and Marcellin Boule's laboratory. 
Licent carried out considerable basic work in connection with missionaries who accumulated observations of a scientific nature in their spare time. 
He was known as 德日進 pinyin: Dérìjìnin China. 
Teilhard wrote several essays, including ``La Messe sur le Monde'' the ``Mass on the World'', in the Ordos Desert. 
In the following year he continued lecturing at the Catholic Institute and participated in a cycle of conferences for the students of the Engineers' Schools. 
Two theological essays on Original Sin sent to a theologian at his request on a purely personal basis were wrongly understood. 
The Church required him to give up his lecturing at the Catholic Institute and to continue his geological research in China. 
Teilhard traveled again to China in April 1926. 
He would remain there more or less twenty years, with many voyages throughout the world. 
He settled until 1932 in Tientsin with Emile Licent then in Beijing. 
From 1926 to 1935, Teilhard made five geological research expeditions in China. 
They enabled him to establish a general geological map of China. 
In 1926 Teilhard's superiors in the Jesuit Order forbade him to teach any longer. 
In 1926--1927 after a missed campaign in Gansu, he traveled in the Sang-Kan-Ho valley near Kalgan Zhangjiakouand made a tour in Eastern Mongolia. 
He wrote ``Le Milieu Divin'' ``the divine Medium''. 
Teilhard prepared the first pages of his main work ``Le Phénomène Humain'' ``The Human Phenomenon''. 
The Holy See refused the Imprimatur for ``Le Milieu Divin'' in 1927. 
He joined the ongoing excavations of the Peking Man Site at Zhoukoudian as an advisor in 1926 and continued in the role for the Cenozoic Research Laboratory of the Geological Survey of China following its founding in 1928. 
He resided in Manchuria with Emile Licent, then stayed in Western Shansi Shanxiand northern Shensi Shaanxiwith the Chinese paleontologist C. C. Young and with Davidson Black, Chairman of the Geological Survey of China. 
After a tour in Manchuria in the area of Great Khingan with Chinese geologists, Teilhard joined the team of American Expedition Center-Asia in the Gobi Desert organised in June and July, by the American Museum of Natural History with Roy Chapman Andrews. 
Henri Breuil and Teilhard discovered that the Peking Man, the nearest relative of ``Pithecanthropus'' from Java, was a ``faber'' worker of stones and controller of fire. 
Teilhard wrote ``L'Esprit de la Terre'' ``the Spirit of the Earth''. 
Teilhard took part as a scientist in the Croisiere Jaune Yellow Cruisefinanced by André Citroën in Central Asia. 
Northwest of Beijing in Kalgan, he joined the Chinese group who joined the second part of the team, the Pamir group, in Aksu. 
He remained with his colleagues for several months in Urumqi, capital of Sinkiang. 
The following year the Sino-Japanese War 1937--1945began. 
Teilhard undertook several explorations in the south of China. 
He traveled in the valleys of Yangtze River and Sichuan in 1934, then, the following year, in Kwang-If and Guangdong. 
The relationship with Marcellin Boule was disrupted; the museum cut its financing on the grounds that Teilhard worked more for the Chinese Geological Service than for the museum. 
During all these years, Teilhard strongly contributed to the constitution of an international network of research in human paleontology related to the whole Eastern and south Eastern zone of the Asian continent. 
He would be particularly associated in this task with two friends, the English/Canadian Davidson Black and the Scot George B. Barbour. 
Many times he would visit France or the United States only to leave these countries to go on further expeditions. 
From 1927 to 1928 Teilhard stayed in France, based in Paris. 
He journeyed to Leuven, Belgium, to Cantal, and to Ariège, France. 
Between several articles in reviews, he met new people such as Paul Valéry and Bruno de Solages, who were to help him in issues with the Catholic Church. 
Answering an invitation from Henry de Monfreid, Teilhard undertook a journey of two months in Obock, in Harrar and in Somalia with his colleague Pierre Lamarre, a geologist, before embarking in Djibouti to return to Tianjin. 
While in China, Teilhard developed a deep and personal friendship with Lucile Swan. 
From 1930--1931 Teilhard stayed in France and in the United States. 
During a conference in Paris, Teilhard stated: ``For the observers of the Future, the greatest event will be the sudden appearance of a collective humane conscience and a human work to make.'' 
From 1932--1933 he began to meet people to clarify issues with the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, regarding ``Le Milieu divin'' and ``L'Esprit de la Terre''. 
He met Helmut de Terra, a German geologist in the International Geology Congress in Washington, DC. 
Teilhard participated in the 1935 Yale--Cambridge expedition in northern and central India with the geologist Helmut de Terra and Patterson, who verified their assumptions on Indian Paleolithic civilisations in Kashmir and the Salt Range Valley. 
He then made a short stay in Java, on the invitation of Professor Ralph van Koenigswald to the site of Java man. 
A second cranium, more complete, was discovered. 
This Dutch paleontologist had found in 1933a tooth in a Chinese apothecary shop in 1934 that he believed belonged to a giant tall ape that lived around half a million years ago. 
In 1937 Teilhard wrote ``Le Phénomène spirituel'' ``The Phenomenon of the Spirit''on board the boat ``the Empress of Japan'', where he met the Raja of Sarawak. 
The ship conveyed him to the United States. 
He received the Mendel Medal granted by Villanova University during the Congress of Philadelphia in recognition of his works on human paleontology. 
He made a speech about evolution, origins and the destiny of Man. 
The ``New York Times'' dated March 19, 1937 presented Teilhard as the Jesuit who held that man descended from monkeys. 
Some days later, he was to be granted the ``Doctor Honoris Causa'' distinction from Boston College. 
Upon arrival in that city, he was told that the award had been cancelled. 
He then stayed in France, where he was immobilized by malaria. 
During his return voyage to Beijing he wrote ``L'Energie spirituelle de la Souffrance'' ``Spiritual Energy of Suffering''Complete Works, tome VII. 
1948: Teilhard was called to Rome by the Superior General of the Jesuits who hoped to acquire permission from the Holy See for the publication of his most important work ``Le Phénomène Humain''. 
But the prohibition to publish it issued in 1944, was again renewed. 
Teilhard was also forbidden to take a teaching post in the College de France. 
1955: Teilhard was forbidden by his Superiors to attend the International Congress of 1957: The Supreme Authority of the Holy Office, in a decree dated 15 November 1957, forbade the works of de Chardin to be retained in libraries, including those of religious institutes. 
His books were not to be sold in Catholic bookshops and were not to be translated in other languages. 
1958: In April of this year, all Jesuit publications in Spain ``Razón y Fe'', ``Sal Terrae'',``Estudios de Deusto''etc., carried a notice from the Spanish Provincial of the Jesuits, that de Chardin's works had been published in Spanish without previous ecclesiastical examination and in defiance of the decrees of the Holy See. 
1962: A decree of the Holy Office dated 30 June, under the authority of Pope John XXIII warned that ``... it is obvious that in philosophical and theological matters, the said works -LSB-Teilhard's-RSB- are replete with ambiguities or rather with serious errors which offend Catholic doctrine. 
That is why ... the Rev. Fathers of the Holy Office urge all Ordinaries, Superiors, and Rectors ... to effectively protect, especially the minds of the young, against the dangers of the works of Fr. 
Teilhard de Chardin and his followers''. 
AAS, 6 August 1962. 
1963: The Vicariate of Rome a diocese ruled in the name of Pope Paul VI who had just become Pope in 1963by his Cardinal Vicarin a decree dated 30 September, required that Catholic booksellers in Rome should withdraw from circulation the works of Teilhard, together with those books which favour his erroneous doctrines. 
The text of this document was published in daily ``L’Aurore'' of Paris, dated 2 October 1963, and was reproduced in ``Nouvelles de Chretiente'', 10 October 1963, p. 35. 
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin died in New York City, where he was in residence at the Jesuit Church of St. Ignatius Loyola, Park Avenue. 
On 15 March 1955, at the house of his diplomat cousin Jean de Lagarde, Teilhard told friends he hoped he would die on Easter Sunday. 
In the Easter Sunday evening of 10 April 1955, during an animated discussion at the apartment of Rhoda de Terra, his personal assistant since 1949, the 73-year-old priest suffered a heart attack; regaining consciousness for a moment, he died a few minutes later. 
He was buried in the cemetery for the New York Province of the Jesuits at the Jesuit novitiate, St. Andrew's-on-the-Hudson in Poughkeepsie, upstate New York. 
Teilhard de Chardin has two comprehensive works. 
The first, ``The Phenomenon of Man'', sets forth a sweeping account of the unfolding of the cosmos and the evolution of matter to humanity to ultimately a reunion with Christ. 
Chardin abandoned literal interpretations of creation in the Book of Genesis in favor of allegorical and theological interpretations. 
In his posthumously published book, ``The Phenomenon of Man'', Teilhard writes of the unfolding of the material cosmos, from primordial particles to the development of life, human beings and the noosphere, and finally to his vision of the Omega Point in the future, which is ``pulling'' all creation towards it. 
He was a leading proponent of orthogenesis, the idea that evolution occurs in a directional, goal driven way, argued in terms that today go under the banner of convergent evolution. 
Teilhard argued in Darwinian terms with respect to biology, and supported the synthetic model of evolution, but argued in Lamarckian terms for the development of culture, primarily through the vehicle of education. 
Teilhard makes sense of the universe by its evolutionary process. 
He interprets complexity as the axis of evolution of matter into a geosphere, a biosphere, into consciousness in man,and then to supreme consciousness the Omega Point.
Teilhard's life work was predicated on the conviction that human spiritual development is moved by the same universal laws as material development. 
He wrote, ''...everything is the sum of the past'' and ''...nothing is comprehensible except through its history. 
`Nature' is the equivalent of `becoming', self-creation: this is the view to which experience irresistibly leads us. 
... There is nothing, not even the human soul, the highest spiritual manifestation we know of, that does not come within this universal law.'' 
There is no doubt that ``The Phenomenon of Man'' represents Teilhard's attempt at reconciling his religious faith with his academic interests as a paleontologist. 
One particularly poignant observation in Teilhard's book entails the notion that evolution is becoming an increasingly optional process. 
Teilhard points to the societal problems of isolation and marginalization as huge inhibitors of evolution, especially since evolution requires a unification of consciousness. 
He states that ``no evolutionary future awaits anyone except in association with everyone else.'' 
Teilhard argued that the human condition necessarily leads to the psychic unity of humankind, though he stressed that this unity can only be voluntary; this voluntary psychic unity he termed ``unanimization.'' 
Teilhard also states that ``evolution is an ascent toward consciousness'', giving encephalization as an example of early stages, and therefore, signifies a continuous upsurge toward the Omega Point, which for all intents and purposes, is God. 
In 1925, Teilhard was ordered by the Jesuit Superior General Wlodimir Ledóchowski to leave his teaching position in France and to sign a statement withdrawing his controversial statements regarding the doctrine of original sin. 
Rather than leave the Jesuit order, Teilhard signed the statement and left for China. 
This was the first of a series of condemnations by certain ecclesiastical officials that would continue until after Teilhard's death. 
The climax of these condemnations was a 1962 monitum reprimandof the Holy Office cautioning on Teilhard's works. 
From the monitum: However, it is noteworthy that the Holy Office did not place any of Teilhard's writings on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum Index of Forbidden Books, which existed during Teilhard's lifetime and at the time of the 1962 decree. 
Shortly thereafter, prominent clerics began a strong theological defense of Teilhard's works. 
Henri de Lubac later a Cardinalwrote three comprehensive books on the theology of Teilhard de Chardin in the 1960s. 
While de Lubac mentioned that Teilhard was less than precise in some of his concepts he nevertheless affirmed the orthodoxy of Teilhard de Chardin with a stinging rebuke to Teilhard's critics ``We need not concern ourselves with a number of detractors of Teilhard, in whom emotion has blunted intelligence''. 
Later that decade a German theologian, Joseph Ratzinger later Pope Benedict XVIspoke glowingly of Teilhard's Christology in Ratzinger's famous ``Introduction to Christianity'': Over the next several decades prominent theologians and Church leaders, including leading Cardinals, Pope John Paul II and Pope Benedict XVI all wrote approvingly of Teilhard's ideas. 
In 1981, Cardinal Agostino Casaroli, on behalf of Pope John Paul II, wrote on the front page of the Vatican newspaper, ``l'Osservatore Romano'': Pope Benedict XVI, in his book ``Spirit of the Liturgy'' incorporates Teilhard's vision as a touchstone of the Catholic Mass: Teilhard was a profound paleontological and geological scientist. 
He made a total commitment to the evolutionary process in the 1920s as the core of his spirituality, at a time when other religious thinkers felt evolutionary thinking challenged the structure of conventional Christian faith. 
He committed himself to what the evidence showed. 
Sir Julian Huxley, evolutionary biologist and contributor to the modern synthesis, praised the thought of Teilhard de Chardin for looking at the way in which human development needs to be examined within a larger integrated universal sense of evolution. 
In 1961, the Nobel Prize-winner Peter Medawar, a British immunologist, wrote a scornful review of ``The Phenomenon Of Man'' for the journal ``Mind'', calling it ``a bag of tricks'' and saying that the author had shown ``an active willingness to be deceived'': ``the greater part of it, I shall show, is nonsense, tricked out with a variety of metaphysical conceits, and its author can be excused of dishonesty only on the grounds that before deceiving others he has taken great pains to deceive himself''. 
The evolutionary biologist Richard Dawkins called Medawar's review ``devastating'' and ``The Phenomenon of Man'' ``the quintessence of bad poetic science''. 
Similarly, Steven Rose wrote that ``Teilhard is revered as a mystic of genius by some, but amongst most biologists is seen as little more than a charlatan.'' 
``Nothing in Biology Makes Sense Except in the Light of Evolution'' by Theodosius Dobzhansky draws upon Teilhard's insistence that evolutionary theory provides the core of how man understands his relationship to nature, calling him ``one of the great thinkers of our age''. 
Key researchers credit Teilhard with the development of the modern evolutionary synthesis that accounts for natural selection in the light of Mendelian genetics. 
Evolutionary biologist Jeremy Griffith described Teilhard as a ``visionary'' philosopher and a contemporary ``truth-sayer'' or ``prophet''. 
Brian Swimme wrote ``Teilhard was one of the first scientists to realize that the human and the universe are inseparable. 
The only universe we know about is a universe that brought forth the human.'' 
Pierre Teilhard de Chardin is honored with a feast day on the liturgical calendar of the Episcopal Church USAon April 10. 
George Gaylord Simpson named the most primitive and ancient genus of true primate, the Eocene genus ``Teilhardina''. 
Teilhard and his work continue to influence the arts and culture. 
Characters based on Teilhard appear in several novels, including Jean Telemond in Morris West's ``The Shoes of the Fisherman'' mentioned by name and quoted by Oskar Werner playing Fr. 
Telemond in the movie version of the noveland Father Lankester Merrin in William Peter Blatty's ``The Exorcist''. 
In Dan Simmons' 1989--97 ``Hyperion Cantos'', Teilhard de Chardin has been canonized a saint in the far future. 
His work inspires the anthropologist priest character, Paul Duré. 
When Duré becomes Pope, he takes ``Teilhard I'' as his regnal name. 
Teilhard appears as a minor character in the play ``Fake'' by Eric Simonson, staged by Chicago's Steppenwolf Theatre Company in 2009, involving a fictional solution to the infamous Piltdown Man hoax. 
References range from occasional quotations--an auto mechanic quotes Teilhard in Philip K. Dick's ``A Scanner Darkly'' -- to serving as the philosophical underpinning of the plot, as Teilhard's work does in Julian May's 1987--94 Galactic Milieu Series. 
Teilhard also plays a major role in Annie Dillard's 1999 ``For the Time Being''. 
Teilhard is mentioned by name and the Omega Point briefly explained in Arthur C. Clarke's and Stephen Baxter's ``The Light of Other Days''. 
The title of the short-story collection ``Everything That Rises Must Converge'' by Flannery O'Connor is a reference to Teilhard's work. 
The American novelist Don DeLillo's 2010 novel ``Point Omega'' borrows its title and some of its ideas from Teilhard de Chardin. 
Robert Wright, in his book '''', compares his own naturalistic thesis that biological and cultural evolution are directional and, possibly, purposeful, with Teilhard's ideas. 
Teilhard's work also inspired philosophical ruminations by Italian laureate architect Paolo Soleri, artworks such as French painter Alfred Manessier's ``L'Offrande de la terre ou Hommage à Teilhard de Chardin'' and American sculptor Frederick Hart's acrylic sculpture ``The Divine Milieu: Homage to Teilhard de Chardin''. 
A sculpture of the Omega Point by Henry Setter, with a quote from Teilhard de Chardin, can be found at the entrance to the Roesch Library at the University of Dayton. 
Edmund Rubbra's 1968 Symphony No. 8 is titled ``Hommage à Teilhard de Chardin''. 
Several college campuses honor Teilhard. 
A building at the University of Manchester is named after him, as are residence dormitories at Gonzaga University and Seattle University. 
The dates in parentheses are the dates of first publication in French and English. 
Most of these works were written years earlier, but Teilhard's ecclesiastical order forbade him to publish them because of their controversial nature. 
The essay collections are organized by subject rather than date, thus each one typically spans many years.
