Daisetsu Teitaro Suzuki 鈴木 大拙 貞太郎 ``Suzuki Daisetsu Teitarō''; he rendered his name ``Daisetz'' in 1894; 18 October 1870 -- 12 July 1966was a Japanese author of books and essays on Buddhism, Zen and Shin that were instrumental in spreading interest in both Zen and Shin and Far Eastern philosophy in generalto the West. 
Suzuki was also a prolific translator of Chinese, Japanese, and Sanskrit literature. 
Suzuki spent several lengthy stretches teaching or lecturing at Western universities, and devoted many years to a professorship at Otani University, a Japanese Buddhist school. 
D. T. Suzuki was born Teitarō Suzuki in Honda-machi, Kanazawa, Ishikawa Prefecture, the fourth son of physician Ryojun Suzuki. 
The Buddhist name ``Daisetsu'', meaning ``Great Humility'', the kanji of which can also mean ``Greatly Clumsy'', was given to him by his Zen master Soen or SoyenShaku. 
Although his birthplace no longer exists, a humble monument marks its location a tree with a rock at its base. 
The samurai class into which Suzuki was born declined with the fall of feudalism, which forced Suzuki's mother, a Jodo Shinshu Buddhist, to raise him in impoverished circumstances after his father died. 
When he became old enough to reflect on his fate in being born into this situation, he began to look for answers in various forms of religion. 
His naturally sharp and philosophical intellect found difficulty in accepting some of the cosmologies to which he was exposed. 
Suzuki studied at the University of Tokyo. 
Suzuki set about acquiring knowledge of Chinese, Sanskrit, Pali, and several European languages. 
During his student years at Tokyo University, Suzuki took up Zen practice at Engaku-ji in Kamakura. 
See Zen Training section, below.
Suzuki lived and studied several years with the scholar Paul Carus. 
Suzuki was introduced to Carus by Soyen Shaku, who met him at the World Parliament of Religions held in Chicago in 1893. 
Carus, who had set up residence in LaSalle, Illinois, approached Soyen Shaku to request his help in translating and preparing Eastern spiritual literature for publication in the West. 
Soyen Shaku instead recommended his student Suzuki for the job. 
Suzuki lived at Dr. Carus's home, the Hegeler Carus Mansion, and worked with him, initially in translating the classic Tao Te Ching from ancient Chinese. 
In Illinois, Suzuki began his early work ``Outlines of Mahayana Buddhism''. 
Carus himself had written a book offering an insight into, and overview of, Buddhism, titled ``The Gospel of Buddha''. 
Soyen Shaku wrote an introduction for it, and Suzuki translated the book into Japanese. 
At this time, around the turn of the century, quite a number of Westerners and Asians Carus, Soyen, and Suzuki includedwere involved in the worldwide Buddhist revival that had begun slowly in the 1880s. 
In 1911, Suzuki married Beatrice Erskine Lane, a Radcliffe graduate and Theosophist with multiple contacts with the Bahá'í Faith both in America and in Japan. 
Later Suzuki himself joined the Theosophical Society Adyar and was an active Theosophist. 
Besides living in the United States, Suzuki traveled through Europe before taking up a professorship back in Japan. 
Suzuki and his wife dedicated themselves to spreading an understanding of Mahayana Buddhism. 
Until 1919 they lived in a cottage on the Engaku-ji grounds, then moved to Kyoto, where Suzuki began professorship at Otani University in 1921. 
While he was in Kyoto, he visited Dr. Hoseki Shinichi Hisamatsu, a famous Zen Buddhist scholar, and discussed Zen Buddhism together at Shunkō-in temple in the Myōshin-ji temple complex. 
In 1921, the same year he joined Otani University, he and his wife founded the Eastern Buddhist Society. 
The Society is focused on Mahayana Buddhism and offers lectures and seminars, and publishes a scholarly journal, ``The Eastern Buddhist''. 
Suzuki maintained connections in the West and, for instance, delivered a paper at the World Congress of Faiths in 1936, at the University of London he was an exchange professor during this year. 
Besides teaching about Zen practice and the history of Zen Buddhism, Suzuki was an expert scholar on the related philosophy called, in Japanese, Kegon, which he thought of as the intellectual explication of Zen experience. 
Still a professor of Buddhist philosophy in the middle decades of the 20th century, Suzuki wrote some of the most celebrated introductions and overall examinations of Buddhism, and particularly of the Zen school. 
He went on a lecture tour of American universities in 1951, and taught at Columbia University from 1952 to 1957. 
Suzuki was especially interested in the formative centuries of this Buddhist tradition, in China. 
A lot of Suzuki's writings in English concern themselves with translations and discussions of bits of the Chan texts the ``Biyan Lu'' Blue Cliff Recordand the ``Wumenguan'' Mumonkan/Gateless Passage, which record the teaching styles and words of the classical Chinese masters. 
He was also interested in how this tradition, once imported into Japan, had influenced Japanese character and history, and wrote about it in English in ``Zen and Japanese Culture''. 
Suzuki's reputation was secured in England prior to the U.S.. 
In addition to his popularly oriented works, Suzuki wrote a translation of the ``Lankavatara Sutra'' and a commentary on its Sanskrit terminology. 
Later in his life he was a visiting professor at Columbia University. 
He looked in on the efforts of Saburō Hasegawa, Judith Tyberg, Alan Watts and the others who worked in the California Academy of Asian Studies now known as the California Institute of Integral Studies, in San Francisco in the 1950s. 
In his later years, he began to explore the Jōdo Shinshū faith of his mother's upbringing, and gave guest lectures on Jōdo Shinshū Buddhism at the Buddhist Churches of America. 
D.T. Suzuki also produced an incomplete English translation of the Kyogyoshinsho, the ``magnum opus'' of Shinran, founder of the Jōdo Shinshū school. 
However, Suzuki did not attempt to popularize the Shin doctrine in the West, as he believed Zen was better suited to the Western preference for Eastern mysticism, though he is quoted as saying that Jōdo Shinshū Buddhism is the ``most remarkable development of Mahayana Buddhism ever achieved in East Asia''. 
Suzuki also took an interest in Christian mysticism and in some of the most significant mystics of the West, for example, Meister Eckhart, whom he compared with the Jōdo Shinshū followers called Myokonin. 
Suzuki was among the first to bring research on the Myokonin to audiences outside Japan as well. 
Other works include ``Essays in Zen Buddhism'' three volumes, ``Studies in Zen Buddhism'', and ``Manual of Zen Buddhism''. 
Additionally, American philosopher William Barrett compiled many of Suzuki's articles and essays concerning Zen into a volume entitled ``Zen Buddhism''. 
Suzuki's Zen master, Soyen Shaku, who also wrote a book published in the United States English translation by Suzuki, had emphasized the Mahayana Buddhist roots of the Zen tradition. 
Suzuki's contrasting view was that, in its centuries of development in China, Zen or Chanhad absorbed much from indigenous Chinese Taoism. 
Suzuki believed that the Far Eastern peoples were more sensitive, or attuned, to nature than either the people of Europe or those of Northern India. 
Suzuki subscribed to the idea that religions are each a sort of organism, which is through timesubject to ``irritation'' and having a capacity to change or evolve. 
It was Suzuki's contention that a Zen ``satori'' awakeningwas the goal of the tradition's training, but that what distinguished the tradition as it developed through the centuries in China was a way of life radically different from that of Indian Buddhists. 
In India, the tradition of the mendicant holy beggar, ``bhikku'' in Paliprevailed, but in China social circumstances led to the development of a temple and training-center system in which the abbot and the monks all performed mundane tasks. 
These included food gardening or farming, carpentry, architecture, housekeeping, administration or community direction, and the practice of folk medicine. 
Consequently, the enlightenment sought in Zen had to stand up well to the demands and potential frustrations of everyday life. 
Suzuki is often linked to the Kyoto School of philosophy, but he is not considered one of its official members. 
Suzuki took an interest in other traditions besides Zen. 
His book ``Zen and Japanese Buddhism'' delved into the history and scope of interest of all the major Japanese Buddhist sects. 
While studying at Tokyo University Suzuki took up Zen practice at Engaku-ji in Kamakura studying initially with Kosen Roshi. 
After Kosen's passing, Suzuki continued with Kosen's successor at Engaku-ji, Soyen Shaku. 
Under Soyen Shaku, Suzuki's studies were essentially internal and non-verbal, including long periods of sitting meditation ``zazen''. 
The task involved what Suzuki described as four years of mental, physical, moral, and intellectual struggle. 
During training periods at Engaku-ji, Suzuki lived a monk's life. 
He described this life and his own experience at Kamakura in his book ``The Training of the Zen Buddhist Monk''. 
Suzuki characterized the facets of the training as: a life of humility; a life of labor; a life of service; a life of prayer and gratitude; and a life of meditation. 
Suzuki was invited by Soyen Shaku to visit the United States in the 1890s, and Suzuki acted as English-language translator for a book written by him 1906. 
Though Suzuki had by this point translated some ancient Asian texts into English e.g. Awakening of Faith in the Mahayana, his role in translating and ghost-writing aspects of Soyen Shaku's book was more the beginning of Suzuki's career as a writer in English. 
Interestingly, later in life Suzuki was more inclined to Jodo Shin True Pure Landpractice on a personal level, seeing in the doctrine of Tariki, or other power as opposed to self power, an abandonment of self that is entirely complementary to Zen practice and yet to his mind even less willful than traditional Zen. 
In his book Buddha of Infinite Light 2002, originally titled, Shin BuddhismSuzuki declared that, ``Of all the developments that Mahayana Buddhism has achieved in East Asia, the most remarkable one is the Shin teaching of Pure Land Buddhism.'' 
p. 22Suzuki was the foremost important person in spreading Zen in the West. 
Philosopher Charles A. Moore said: That Suzuki was a university-educated intellectual steeped in knowledge of Western philosophy and literature allowed him to be particularly successful and persuasive in presenting his case to a Western audience. 
As Suzuki portrayed it, Zen Buddhism was a highly practical religion whose emphasis on direct experience made it particularly comparable to forms of mysticism that scholars such as William James had emphasized as the fountainhead of all religious sentiment. 
It is this idea of a common essence which made Suzuki's ideas recognizable to a Western audience, who could identify with the Western esotericism concealed in it, disguised as eastern metaphysics. 
Suzuki presents a version of Zen that can be described as detraditionalized and essentialized. 
This resemblance is not coincidental, since Suzuki was also influenced by Western esotericism, and even joined the Theosophical Society. 
Several scholars have identified Suzuki as a Buddhist modernist. 
As scholar David McMahan describes it, Buddhist modernism consists of Most scholars agree that the influence of Protestant and Enlightenment values have largely defined some of the more conspicuous attributes of Buddhist modernism. 
McMahan cites Buddhist modernist traditions often consist of a deliberate de-emphasis of the ritual and metaphysical elements of the religion, as these elements are seen as incommensurate with the discourses of modernity. 
Buddhist modernist traditions have also been characterized as being ``detraditionalized,'' often being presented in a way that occludes their historical construction. 
Instead, Buddhist modernists often employ an essentialized description of their tradition, where key tenets are described as universal and ``sui generis''. 
It was this form of Zen that has been popularized in the West: Suzuki has been criticized for this essentialist approach. 
As early as 1951 Hu Shih, himself following a Chinese nationalist agenda, accused Suzuki of presenting an idealist picture of Zen. 
According to Sharf and Victoria, Suzuki was associated with Japanese nationalism and its propagation via the appraisal of Japanese Zen. 
He has been criticised for defending the Japanese war-efforts, though Suzuki's thoughts on these have also been placed in the context of western supremacy in the first half of the 20th century, and the reaction against this supremacy in Asian countries. 
Brian Victoria delivered in Germany in 2012 in which he revealed evidence of Suzuki's sympathy for the Nazi regime. 
Victoria writes, ``D.T. Suzuki left a record of his early view of the Nazi movement that was included in a series of articles published in the Japanese Buddhist newspaper, Chūgai Nippō, on October 3, 4, 6, 11, and 13, 1936.'' 
In this Suzuki expresses his agreement with Hitler's policies as explained to him by a relative living in Germany. 
``While they don't know much about politics, they have never enjoyed greater peace of mind than they have now. 
For this alone, they want to cheer Hitler on. 
This is what my relative told me. 
It is quite understandable, and I am in agreement with him.'' 
He also expresses agreement with Hitler's expulsion of the Jews from Germany. 
``Changing the topic to Hitler's expulsion of the Jews, it appears that in this, too, there are a lot of reasons for his actions. 
While it is a very cruel policy, when looked at from the point of view of the current and future happiness of the entire German people, it may be that, for a time, some sort of extreme action is necessary in order to preserve the nation.'' 
While supporting anti-Jewish measures, and stating that ``The Jews are a parasitic people who are not indigenous.
.'' 
and ``The fact that they have no country is karmic retribution J. gōhōon the Jews,'' Suzuki expressed sympathy with individual Jews. 
``As regards individuals, this is truly a regrettable situation.'' 
At the onset of modernization in the Meji period, in 1868, when Japan entered into the international community, Buddhism was briefly persecuted in Japan as ``a corrupt, decadent, anti-social, parasitic, and superstitious creed, inimical to Japan's need for scientific and technological advancement.'' 
The Japanese government intended to eradicate the tradition, which was seen as a foreign ``other'', incapable of fostering the nativist sentiments that would be vital for national, ideological cohesion. 
In addition to this, industrialization led to the breakdown of the parishioner system that had funded Buddhist monasteries for centuries. 
However, a group of modern Buddhist leaders emerged to argue for the Buddhist cause. 
These leaders stood in agreement with the government persecution of Buddhism, accepting the notion of a corrupt Buddhist institution in need of revitalization. 
As a response to the modernisation of Japan and the persecution of Buddhism, the ``shin bukkyo'', or ``New Buddhism'' came into existence. 
It was led by university-educated intellectuals who had been exposed to a vast body of Western intellectual literature. 
Advocates of New Buddhism, like Suzuki's teachers Kosen and his successor Soyen Shaku, saw this movement as a defense of Buddhism against government persecution, and also saw it as a way to bring their nation into the modern world as a competitive cultural force. 
Scholars such as Martin Verhoeven and Robert Sharf, as well as Japanese Zen monk G. Victor Sogen Hori, have argued that the breed of Japanese Zen that was propagated by New Buddhism ideologues, such as Imakita Kosen and Soyen Shaku, was not typical of Japanese Zen during their time, nor is it typical of Japanese Zen now. 
Its importance lies especially within western Zen: The traditional form of Zen has been greatly altered by the Meiji restoration, but Japanese Zen still flourishes as a monastic tradition. 
The Zen tradition in Japan, in its customary form, required a great deal of time and discipline from monks that laity would have difficulty finding. 
Zen monks were often expected to have spent several years in intensive doctrinal study, memorizing sutras and poring over commentaries, before even entering the monastery to undergo koan practice in sanzen with the roshi. 
The fact that Suzuki himself was able to do so as a laymanwas largely the invention of New Buddhism. 
During the Meiji restoration the Nihonjinron-philosophy took prevalence. 
It emphasizes the uniqueness of the Japanese. 
This uniqueness has been attributed to many different factors. 
Suzuki attributed it to Zen. 
In his view, Zen embodies the ultimate essence of all philosophy and religion. 
He pictured Zen as a unique expression of Asian spirituality, which was considered to be superior to the western ways of thinking. 
Suzuki's books have been widely read and commented on by many important figures. 
A notable example is ``An Introduction to Zen Buddhism'', which includes a 30-page commentary by famous analytical psychologist Carl Jung. 
Carl Jung wrote of him: But Jung was also critical, warning against an uncritical borrowing from Asian spirituality. 
These essays were enormously influential when they came out, making Zen known in the West for the very first time:
