Martha Craven Nussbaum ; born May 6, 1947is an American philosopher and the current Ernst Freund Distinguished Service Professor of Law and Ethics at the University of Chicago, a chair that includes appointments in the philosophy department and the law school. 
She has a particular interest in ancient Greek and Roman philosophy, political philosophy, feminism, and ethics, including animal rights. 
She also holds associate appointments in classics, divinity and political science, is a member of the Committee on Southern Asian Studies, and a board member of the Human Rights Program. 
She previously taught at Harvard and Brown. 
Nussbaum is the author or editor of a number of books, including ``The Fragility of Goodness'' 1986, ``Sex and Social Justice'' 1998, ``The Sleep of Reason'' 2002, ``Hiding From Humanity: Disgust, Shame, and the Law'' 2004, and ``Frontiers of Justice: Disability, Nationality, Species Membership'' 2006. 
Nussbaum was born in New York City, the daughter of George Craven, a Philadelphia lawyer, and Betty Warren, an interior designer and homemaker; during her teenage years, Nussbaum attended the Baldwin School in Bryn Mawr. 
She described her upbringing as ``East Coast WASP elite...very sterile, very preoccupied with money and status''. 
She would later credit her impatience with ``mandarin philosophers'' as the ``repudiation of my own aristocratic upbringing. 
I don't like anything that sets itself up as an in-group or an elite, whether it is the Bloomsbury group or Derrida''. 
She studied theatre and classics at New York University, getting a BA in 1969, and gradually moved to philosophy while at Harvard University, where she received an MA in 1972 and a PhD in 1975, studying under G. E. L. Owen. 
This period also saw her marriage to Alan Nussbaum divorced in 1987, her conversion to Judaism, and the birth of her daughter Rachel, who is currently a history professor at Evergreen State College. 
Nussbaum's interest in Judaism has continued and deepened: on August 16, 2008 she became a ``bat mitzvah'' in a service at Temple K. A. M. Isaiah Israel in Chicago's Hyde Park, chanting from the ``Parasha Va-etchanan'' and the ``Haftarah Nahamu'', and delivering a ``D'var Torah'' about the connection between genuine, non-narcissistic consolation and the pursuit of global justice. 
During her studies at Harvard, Nussbaum claims she encountered a tremendous amount of discrimination, including sexual harassment, and problems getting childcare for her daughter. 
When she became the first woman to hold the Junior Fellowship at Harvard, Nussbaum received a congratulatory note from a ``prestigious classicist'' who suggested that since ``female fellowess'' was an awkward name, she should be called ``hetaira'', for in Greece these educated courtesans were the only women who participated in philosophical symposia. 
She taught philosophy and classics at Harvard in the 1970s and early 1980s, where she was denied tenure by the Classics Department in 1982. 
Nussbaum then moved to Brown University, where she taught until the mid-1990s. 
Her 1986 book ``The Fragility of Goodness'', on ancient Greek ethics and Greek tragedy, made her a well-known figure throughout the humanities. 
More recent work ``Frontiers of Justice''establishes Nussbaum as a theorist of global justice. 
Nussbaum's work on capabilities has often focused on the unequal freedoms and opportunities of women, and she has developed a distinctive type of feminism, drawing inspiration from the liberal tradition, but emphasizing that liberalism, at its best, entails radical rethinking of gender relations and relations within the family. 
Nussbaum's other major area of philosophical work is the emotions. 
She has defended a ``neo-Stoic'' account of emotions that holds that they are appraisals that ascribe to things and persons, outside the agent's own control, great significance for the person's own flourishing. 
On this basis she has proposed analyses of grief, compassion, and love, and, in a later book, of disgust and shame. 
Nussbaum has engaged in many spirited debates with other intellectuals, in her academic writings as well as in the pages of semi-popular magazines and book reviews and, in one instance, when testifying as an expert witness in court. 
She testified in the Colorado bench trial for ``Romer v. Evans'', arguing against the claim that the history of philosophy provides the state with a ``compelling interest'' in favor of a law denying gays and lesbians the right to seek passage of local non-discrimination laws. 
A portion of this testimony, dealing with the potential meanings of the term ``tolmêma'' in Plato's work, was the subject of controversy, and was called misleading and even perjurious by critics. 
She responded to these charges in a lengthy article called ``Platonic Love and Colorado Law''. 
Nussbaum used multiple references from Plato's ``Symposium'' and his interactions with Socrates as evidence for her argument. 
The debate continued with a reply by one of her sternest critics, Robert P. George. 
Nussbaum has criticized Noam Chomsky as being among the leftist intellectuals who hold the belief that ``one should not criticize one's friends, that solidarity is more important than ethical correctness''. 
She suggests that one can ``trace this line to an old Marxist contempt for bourgeois ethics, but it is loathsome whatever its provenance''. 
Among the people whose books she has reviewed critically are Allan Bloom, Harvey Mansfield, and Judith Butler. 
Her more serious and academic debates have been with figures such as John Rawls, Richard Posner, and Susan Moller Okin. 
Nussbaum is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences elected 1988and the American Philosophical Society. 
In 2008 she was elected a Corresponding Fellow of the British Academy. 
She is a Founding President and Past President of the Human Development and Capability Association and a Past President of the American Philosophical Association, Central Division. 
``The Fragility of Goodness'' confronts the ethical dilemma that individuals strongly committed to justice are nevertheless vulnerable to external factors that may deeply compromise or even negate their human flourishing. 
Discussing literary as well as philosophical texts, Nussbaum seeks to determine the extent to which reason may enable self-sufficiency. 
She eventually rejects the Platonic notion that human goodness can fully protect against peril, siding with the tragic playwrights and Aristotle in treating the acknowledgment of vulnerability as a key to realizing the human good. 
Her interpretation of Plato's ``Symposium'' in particular drew considerable attention. 
Under Nussbaum's consciousness of vulnerability, the re-entrance of Alcibiades at the end of the dialogue undermines Diotima's account of the ladder of love in its ascent to the non-physical realm of the forms. 
Alcibiades's presence deflects attention back to physical beauty, sexual passions, and bodily limitations, hence highlighting human fragility. 
``Fragility'' made Nussbaum famous throughout the humanities. 
It garnered wide praise in academic reviews, and even drew acclaim in the popular media. 
Camille Paglia credited ``Fragility'' with matching ``the highest academic standards'' of the twentieth century, and ``The Times Higher Education'' called it ``a supremely scholarly work''. 
Nussbaum's fame extended her influence beyond print and into television programs like PBS's Bill Moyers. 
``Cultivating Humanity'' appeals to classical Greek texts as a basis for defense and reform of the liberal education. 
Noting the Greek cynic philosopher Diogenes' aspiration to transcend ``local origins and group memberships'' in favor of becoming ``a citizen of the world,'' Nussbaum traces the development of this idea through the Stoics, Cicero, and eventually modern liberalism of Adam Smith and Immanuel Kant. 
Nussbaum champions multiculturalism in the context of ethical universalism utilitarianism, defends scholarly inquiry into race, gender, and human sexuality, and further develops the role of literature as narrative imagination into ethical questions. 
At the same time, Nussbaum also censured certain scholarly trends. 
She excoriated deconstructionist Jacques Derrida as ``simply not worth studying'' and labels his analysis of Chinese culture ``pernicious'' and without ``evidence of serious study.'' 
More broadly, Nussbaum criticized Michel Foucault for his ``historical incompleteness and lack of conceptual clarity,'' but nevertheless singled him out for providing ``the only truly important work to have entered philosophy under the banner of `postmodernism.''' 
Nussbaum is even more critical of figures like Allan Bloom, Roger Kimball, and George Will for what she considers their ``shaky'' knowledge of non-Western cultures and inaccurate caricatures of today's humanities departments. 
``The New York Times'' praised ``Cultivating Humanity'' as ``a passionate, closely argued defense of multiculturalism'' and hailed it as ``a formidable, perhaps definitive defense of diversity on American campuses.'' 
Nussbaum was the 2002 recipient of the University of Louisville Grawmeyer Award in Education. 
In 2010, Nussbaum published ``Not For Profit: Why Democracy Needs the Humanities'', which extends the analysis of ``Cultivating Humanity'' to schools and universities in many different countries, arguing that liberal arts education, currently under threat all over the world, supplies skills without which democracies are unlikely to remain stable. 
``Sex and Social Justice'' sets out to demonstrate that sex and sexuality are morally irrelevant distinctions that have been artificially enforced as sources of social hierarchy; thus, feminism and social justice have common concerns. 
Rebutting anti-universalist objections, Nussbaum proposes functional freedoms, or central human capabilities, as a rubric of social justice. 
Nussbaum discusses at length the feminist critiques of liberalism itself, including the charge advanced by Alison Jaggar that liberalism demands ethical egoism. 
Nussbaum notes that liberalism emphasizes respect for ``others'' as individuals, and further argues that Jaggar has elided the distinction between individualism and self-sufficiency. 
Nussbaum accepts Catharine MacKinnon's critique of abstract liberalism, assimilating the salience of history and context of group hierarchy and subordination, but concludes that this appeal is rooted in liberalism rather than a critique of it. 
Nussbaum condemns the practice of female genital mutilation, citing deprivation of normative human functioning in its risks to health, impact on sexual functioning, violations of dignity, and conditions of non-autonomy. 
Emphasizing that female genital mutilation is carried out by brute force, its irreversibility, its non-consensual nature, and its links to customs of male domination, Nussbaum urges feminists to confront female genital mutilation as an issue of injustice. 
Nussbaum also refines the concept of ``objectification,'' as originally advanced by Catharine MacKinnon and Andrea Dworkin. 
Nussbaum defines the idea of treating as an object with seven qualities: instrumentality, denial of autonomy, inertness, fungibility, violability, ownership, and denial of subjectivity. 
Her characterization of pornography as a tool of objectification puts Nussbaum at odds with sex-positive feminism. 
At the same time, Nussbaum argues in support of the legalization of prostitution, a position she reiterated in a 2008 essay following the Spitzer scandal, writing, ``The idea that we ought to penalize women with few choices by removing one of the ones they do have is grotesque.'' 
``Sex and Social Justice'' was lauded by critics in the press. 
Salon declared, ``She shows brilliantly how sex is used to deny some people--i.e., women and gay men--social justice.'' 
The ``New York Times'' praised the work as ``elegantly written and closely argued.'' 
Kathryn Trevenen praised Nussbaum's effort to shift feminist concerns toward interconnected transnational efforts, and for explicating a set of universal guidelines to structure an agenda of social justice. 
Patrick Hopkins singled out for praise Nussbaum's ``masterful'' chapter on sexual objectification. 
Radical feminist Andrea Dworkin faulted Nussbaum for ``consistent over-intellectualisation of emotion, which has the inevitable consequence of mistaking suffering for cruelty.'' 
``Hiding from Humanity'' extends Nussbaum's work in moral psychology to probe the arguments for including two emotions--shame and disgust--as legitimate bases for legal judgments. 
Nussbaum argues that individuals tend to repudiate their bodily imperfection or animality through the projection of fears about contamination. 
This cognitive response is in itself irrational, because we cannot transcend the animality of our bodies. 
Noting how projective disgust has wrongly justified group subordination mainly of women, Jews, and homosexuals, Nussbaum ultimately discards disgust as a reliable basis of judgment. 
Turning to shame, Nussbaum argues that shame takes too broad a target, attempting to inculcate humiliation on a scope that is too intrusive and limiting on human freedom. 
Nussbaum sides with John Stuart Mill in narrowing legal concern to acts that cause a distinct and assignable harm. 
In an interview with ``Reason'' magazine, Nussbaum elaborated, ``Disgust and shame are inherently hierarchical; they set up ranks and orders of human beings. 
They are also inherently connected with restrictions on liberty in areas of non-harmful conduct. 
For both of these reasons, I believe, anyone who cherishes the key democratic values of equality and liberty should be deeply suspicious of the appeal to those emotions in the context of law and public policy.'' 
Nussbaum's work was received with wide praise. 
The ``Boston Globe'' called her argument ``characteristically lucid'' and hailed her as ``America's most prominent philosopher of public life.'' 
Her reviews in national newspapers and magazines garnered unanimous praise. 
In academic circles, Stefanie A. Lindquist of Vanderbilt University lauded Nussbaum's analysis as a ``remarkably wide ranging and nuanced treatise on the interplay between emotions and law.'' 
A prominent exception was Roger Kimball's review published in the ``New Criterion'', in which he accused Nussbaum of ``fabricating'' the renewed prevalence of shame and disgust in public discussions and says she intends to ``undermine the inherited moral wisdom of millennia.'' 
He rebukes her for ``contempt for the opinions of ordinary people'' and ultimately accuses Nussbaum herself of ``hiding from humanity.'' 
Nussbaum has recently drawn on and extended her work on disgust to produce a new analysis of the legal issues regarding sexual orientation and same-sex conduct. 
Her book ``From Disgust to Humanity: Sexual Orientation and the Constitution'' was published by Oxford University Press in 2009, as part of their ``Inalienable Rights'' series, edited by Geoffrey Stone. 
In the 2010 book ``From Disgust to Humanity: Sexual Orientation and Constitutional Law'' Martha Nussbaum analyzes the role that disgust plays in law and public debate in the United States. 
The book primarily analyzes constitutional legal issues facing gay and lesbian Americans but also analyzes issues such as anti-miscegenation statutes, segregation, antisemitism and the caste system in India as part of its broader thesis regarding the ``politics of disgust''. 
Nussbaum posits that the fundamental motivations of those advocating legal restrictions against gay and lesbian Americans is a ``politics of disgust''. 
These legal restrictions include blocking sexual orientation being protected under anti-discrimination laws See: ``Romer v. Evans'', sodomy laws against consenting adults See: ``Lawrence v. Texas'', constitutional bans against same-sex marriage See: California Proposition 8 2008, over-strict regulation of gay bathhouses, and bans on sex in public parks and public restrooms. 
Nussbaum also argues that legal bans on polygamy and certain forms of incestuous e.g. brother-sistermarriage partake of the politics of disgust and should be overturned. 
She identifies the ``politics of disgust'' closely with Lord Devlin and his famous opposition to the Wolfenden report that recommended decriminalizing private consensual homosexual acts on the basis that those things would ``disgust the average man.'' 
To Devlin, the mere fact some people or act may produce popular emotional reactions of disgust provides an appropriate guide for legislating. 
She also identifies the `wisdom of repugnance' as advocated by Leon Kass as another ``politics of disgust'' school of thought as it claims that disgust ``in crucial cases...repugnance is the emotional expression of deep wisdom, beyond reason's power fully to articulate it.'' 
Nussbaum goes on to explicitly oppose the concept of a disgust-based morality as an appropriate guide for legislating. 
Nussbaum notes that popular disgust has been used throughout history as a justification for persecution. 
Drawing upon her earlier work on the relationship between disgust and shame, Nussbaum notes that at various times, racism, antisemitism, and sexism, have all been driven by popular revulsion. 
In place of this ``politics of disgust,'' Nussbaum argues for the harm principle from John Stuart Mill as the proper basis for limiting individual liberties. 
Nussbaum argues the harm principle, which supports the legal ideas of consent, the age of majority, and privacy, protects citizens while the ``politics of disgust'' is merely an unreliable emotional reaction with no inherent wisdom. 
Furthermore, Nussbaum argues this ``politics of disgust'' has denied and continues to deny citizens humanity and equality before the law on no rational grounds and causes palpable social harms to the groups affected. 
``From Disgust to Humanity'' earned acclaim in the United States, and prompted interviews in the ``New York Times'' and other magazines. 
One conservative magazine, ``The American Spectator'', offered a dissenting view, writing, ``account of the `politics of disgust' lacks coherence, and `the politics of humanity' betrays itself by not treating more sympathetically those opposed to the gay rights movement.'' 
The article also argues that book is marred by factual errors and inconsistencies. 
During the 1980s Nussbaum collaborated with economist Amartya Sen on issues of development and ethics which culminated in ``The Quality of Life'', published in 1993 by Oxford University Press. 
Together with Sen and a group of younger scholars, Nussbaum founded the Human Development and Capability Association in 2003. 
With Sen, she promoted the ``capabilities approach'' to development, which views capabilities ``substantial freedoms'', such as the ability to live to old age, engage in economic transactions, or participate in political activitiesas the constitutive parts of development, and poverty as capability-deprivation. 
This contrasts with traditional utilitarian views that see development purely in terms of economic growth, and poverty purely as income-deprivation. 
It is also universalist, and therefore contrasts with relativist approaches to development. 
Much of the work is presented from an Aristotelian perspective. 
Nussbaum furthered the capabilities approach in ``Frontiers of Justice'' 2006, to expand upon social contractarian explanations of justice, as developed most extensively by John Rawls' in his ``A Theory of Justice'', ``Political Liberalism'', ``The Law of Peoples'', and related works. 
Nussbaum argues that standard social contractarianism, while far better than utilitarianism in providing a satisfactory framework for justice, relies on the belief and assumption that cooperation is pursued for the purpose of securing mutual advantage. 
Views deriving from the classical tradition of the social contract, she argues, therefore have great difficulty dealing with issues of basic justice and substantial freedom in situations where there are great asymmetries of power among the parties. 
As such, Nussbaum argues that the procedural justice-based approach of contractarianism fails to address areas in which symmetrical advantage does not exist, namely, in the contexts of justice for the disabled, transnational justice, and justice for animals ``the three frontiers''. 
Noting that Rawls himself acknowledged the failure of his theory of justice to comprehensively address these three frontiers, Nussbaum claims that Rawls's attempt to expand his theory to address one of these areas -- transnational justice -- is ``ultimately unsatisfying'' because he fails to follow through with the essential elements developed in ``A Theory of Justice'', namely, by relaxing some of the key assumptions about the parties to the original contract. 
Nussbaum argues that the contractarian approach cannot explain justice in the absence of free, equal and independent parties in an original position in which ``all have something with which to bargain and none have too much'' with reference to Jean Jacques Rousseau and David Hume, concluding that the procedural perspective alone cannot provide an adequate theory of justice. 
To address this perceived problem, Nussbaum introduces the capabilities approach, an outcome-oriented view that seeks to determine what basic principles, and adequate measure thereof, would fulfill a life of human dignity. 
As part of her capabilities approach, rather than relying upon something akin to Rawls's assumption of mutual advantage as a basis for social cooperation, Nussbaum posits ``a wide range of motives, including the love of justice itself, and prominently including a moralized compassion for those who have less than they need to lead decent and dignified lives.'' 
Nussbaum frames her basic principles in terms of ten capabilities, i.e. real opportunities based on personal and social circumstance. 
Nussbaum argues that justice demands the pursuit, for all citizens, of a minimum threshold of these ten capabilities. 
She further developed the idea of the threshold, with reference to constitutional law, in her Foreword to the 2007 Supreme Court issue of the ``Harvard Law Review'', ``Constitutions and Capabilities: `Perception' Against Lofty Formalism'', which would ultimately appear in revised form as the book ``Creating Capabilities: The Human Development Approach'' 2011. 
``Creating Capabilities'' presents the approach in a brief and accessible form for a general audience. 
Nussbaum also further elaborated her capabilities approach, in particular its justificatory elements as they relate to severely cognitively disabled persons, in a 2010 article called ``The Capabilities of People with Cognitive Disability,'' published as part of a book edited by Eva Kittay and Licia Carlson ``Cognitive Disability and Its Challenge to Moral Philosophy''. 
Nussbaum's book, ``Liberty of Conscience: In Defense of America's Tradition of Religious Equality'' Basic Books 2008explores the constitutional requirements of justice in the area of religious liberty, and this work is extended to current controversies with ``The New Religious Intolerance: Overcoming the Politics of Fear in an Anxious Age'' Harvard University Press, 2012. 
``Political Emotions: Why Love Matters for Justice'', a book on the moral psychology of the capabilities approach, which brings together her work on the emotions with the analysis of social justice, was published in 2013. 
Another book entitled ``The Cosmopolitan Tradition'' is under contract to Harvard University Press. 
In May and June 2014, Nussbaum delivered the John Locke Lectures at Oxford University on the topic of anger, forgiveness, and reconciliation. 
The related book will be published in 2015 by Oxford University Press. 
She has 51 honorary degrees from colleges and universities in North America, Latin America, Europe, Africa and Asia, including from:
