Paul Johannes Tillich August 20, 1886 -- October 22, 1965was a German American Christian existentialist philosopher and theologian who is widely regarded as one of the most influential theologians of the twentieth century. 
Among the general public, he is best known for his works ``The Courage to Be'' 1952and ``Dynamics of Faith'' 1957, which introduced issues of theology and modern culture to a general readership. 
Theologically, he is best known for his major three-volume work ``Systematic Theology'' 1951--63in which he developed his ``method of correlation'', an approach of exploring the symbols of Christian revelation as answers to the problems of human existence raised by contemporary existential philosophical analysis. 
Tillich was born on August 20, 1886, in the small village of Starzeddel Starosiedle, Province of Brandenburg, which village was then part of Germany. 
He was the oldest of three children, with two sisters: Johanna born 1888, died 1920and Elisabeth born 1893. 
Tillich's Prussian father Johannes Tillich was a conservative Lutheran pastor of the Evangelical State Church of Prussia's older Provinces; his mother Mathilde Dürselen was from the Rhineland and more liberal. 
When Tillich was four, his father became superintendent of a diocese in Bad Schönfliess now Trzcińsko-Zdrój, Poland, a town of three thousand, where Tillich began secondary school ``Elementarschule''. 
In 1898, Tillich was sent to Königsberg in der Neumark now Chojna, Polandto begin his ``gymnasium'' schooling. 
He was billeted in a boarding house and experienced a loneliness that he sought to overcome by reading the Bible while encountering humanistic ideas at school. 
In 1900, Tillich's father was transferred to Berlin, Tillich switching in 1901 to a Berlin school, from which he graduated in 1904. 
Before his graduation, however, his mother died of cancer in September 1903, when Tillich was 17. 
Tillich attended several universities--the University of Berlin beginning in 1904, the University of Tübingen in 1905, and the University of Halle-Wittenberg from 1905 to 1907. 
He received his Doctor of Philosophy degree at the University of Breslau in 1911 and his Licentiate of Theology degree at Halle-Wittenberg in 1912. 
During his time at university, he became a member of the Wingolf in Berlin, Tübingen and Halle. 
That same year, 1912, Tillich was ordained as a Lutheran minister in the Province of Brandenburg. 
On 28 September 1914 he married Margarethe ``Grethi''Wever 1888--1968, and in October he joined the Imperial German Army as a chaplain during World War I. Grethi deserted Tillich in 1919 after an affair that produced a child not fathered by Tillich; the two then divorced. 
Tillich's academic career began after the war; he became a Privatdozent of Theology at the University of Berlin, a post he held from 1919 to 1924. 
On his return from the war he had met Hannah Werner-Gottschow, then married and pregnant. 
In March 1924 they married; it was the second marriage for both. 
From 1924 to 1925, Tillich served as a Professor of Theology at the University of Marburg, where he began to develop his systematic theology, teaching a course on it during the last of his three terms. 
From 1925 until 1929, Tillich was a Professor of Theology at the Dresden University of Technology and the University of Leipzig. 
He held the same post at the University of Frankfurt from 1929 to 1933. 
Paul Tillich was in conversation with Erich Przywara. 
While at the University of Frankfurt, Tillich gave public lectures and speeches throughout Germany that brought him into conflict with the Nazi movement. 
When Adolf Hitler became German Chancellor in 1933, Tillich was dismissed from his position. 
Reinhold Niebuhr visited Germany in the summer of 1933 and, already impressed with Tillich's writings, contacted Tillich upon learning of Tillich's dismissal. 
Niebuhr urged Tillich to join the faculty at New York City's Union Theological Seminary; Tillich accepted. 
At the age of 47, Tillich moved with his family to America. 
This meant learning English, the language in which Tillich would eventually publish works such as the ``Systematic Theology''. 
From 1933 until 1955 he taught at Union, where he began as a Visiting Professor of Philosophy of Religion. 
During 1933--34 he was also a Visiting Lecturer in Philosophy at Columbia University. 
Tillich acquired tenure at Union in 1937, and in 1940 he was promoted to Professor of Philosophical Theology and became an American citizen. 
At the Union Theological Seminary, Tillich earned his reputation, publishing a series of books that outlined his particular synthesis of Protestant Christian theology and existential philosophy. 
He published ``On the Boundary'' in 1936; ``The Protestant Era'', a collection of his essays, in 1948; and ``The Shaking of the Foundations'', the first of three volumes of his sermons, also in 1948. 
His collections of sermons would give Tillich a broader audience than he had yet experienced. 
His most heralded achievements though, were the 1951 publication of volume one of ``Systematic Theology'' which brought Tillich academic acclaim, and the 1952 publication of ``The Courage to Be''. 
The first volume of the systematic theology series prompted an invitation to give the prestigious Gifford lectures during 1953--54 at the University of Aberdeen. 
The latter book, called ``his masterpiece'', was based on his 1950 Dwight H. Terry Lectureship and reached a wide general readership. 
These works led to an appointment at the Harvard Divinity School in 1955, where he became one of the University's five University Professors -- the five highest ranking professors at Harvard. 
In 1961 Tillich became one of the founding members of the Society for the Arts, Religion and Contemporary Culture, an organization with which he maintained ties for the remainder of his life. 
During this period, he published volume 2 of ``Systematic Theology'' and also the popular book ``Dynamics of Faith'' both 1957. 
His career at Harvard lasted until 1962 when he moved to the University of Chicago, remaining a professor of theology there until his death in 1965. 
Volume 3 of ``Systematic Theology'' was published in 1963. 
In 1964, Tillich became the first theologian to be honored in Kegley and Bretall's ``Library of Living Theology'': ``The adjective `great,' in our opinion, can be applied to very few thinkers of our time, but Tillich, we are far from alone in believing, stands unquestionably amongst these few''. 
A widely quoted critical assessment of his importance was Georgia Harkness' comment: ``What Whitehead was to American philosophy, Tillich has been to American theology''. 
Tillich died on October 22, 1965, ten days after having a heart attack. 
In 1966, his ashes were interred in the Paul Tillich Park in New Harmony, Indiana. 
The key to understanding Tillich's theology is what he calls the ``method of correlation.'' 
It is an approach that correlates insights from Christian revelation with the issues raised by existential, psychological, and philosophical analysis. 
For Tillich, the existential questions of human existence are associated with the field of philosophy and, more specifically, ontology the study of being. 
This is because, according to Tillich, a lifelong pursuit of philosophy reveals that the central question of every philosophical inquiry always comes back to the question of being, or what it means to be, to exist, to be a finite human being. 
To be correlated with these questions are the theological answers, themselves derived from Christian revelation. 
The task of the philosopher primarily involves developing the questions, whereas the task of the theologian primarily involves developing the answers to these questions. 
However, it should be remembered that the two tasks overlap and include one another: the theologian must be somewhat of a philosopher and vice versa, for Tillich's notion of faith as ``ultimate concern'' necessitates that the theological answer be correlated with, compatible with, and in response to the general ontological question which must be developed independently from the answers. 
Thus, on one side of the correlation lies an ontological analysis of the human situation, whereas on the other is a presentation of the Christian message as a response to this existential dilemma. 
For Tillich, no formulation of the question can contradict the theological answer. 
This is because the Christian message claims, ``a priori'', that the ``logos'' ``who became flesh'' is also the universal ``logos'' of the Greeks. 
In addition to the intimate relationship between philosophy and theology, another important aspect of the method of correlation is Tillich's distinction between form and content in the theological answers. 
While the nature of revelation determines the actual content of the theological answers, the character of the questions determines the form of these answers. 
This is because, for Tillich, theology must be an answering theology, or apologetic theology. 
God is called the ``ground of being'' because God is the answer to the ontological threat of non-being, and this characterization of the theological answer in philosophical terms means that the answer has been conditioned insofar as its form is consideredby the question. 
Throughout the ``Systematic Theology'', Tillich is careful to maintain this distinction between form and content without allowing one to be inadvertently conditioned by the other. 
Many criticisms of Tillich's methodology revolve around this issue of whether the integrity of the Christian message is really maintained when its form is conditioned by philosophy. 
The theological answer is also determined by the sources of theology, our experience, and the norm of theology. 
Though the form of the theological answers are determined by the character of the question, these answers which ``are contained in the revelatory events on which Christianity is based''are also ``taken by systematic theology from the sources, through the medium, under the norm.'' 
There are three main sources of systematic theology: the Bible, Church history, and the history of religion and culture. 
Experience is not a source but a medium through which the sources speak. 
And the norm of theology is that by which both sources and experience are judged with regard to the content of the Christian faith. 
Thus, we have the following as elements of the method and structure of systematic theology: As McKelway explains, the sources of theology contribute to the formation of the norm, which then becomes the criterion through which the sources and experience are judged. 
The relationship is circular, as it is the present situation which conditions the norm in the interaction between church and biblical message. 
The norm is then subject to change, but Tillich insists that its basic content remains the same: that of the biblical message. 
It is tempting to conflate revelation with the norm, but we must keep in mind that revelation whether original or dependentis not an element of the structure of systematic theology per se, but an event. 
For Tillich, the present-day norm is the ``New Being in Jesus as the Christ as our Ultimate Concern''. 
This is because the present question is one of estrangement, and the overcoming of this estrangement is what Tillich calls the ``New Being''. 
But since Christianity answers the question of estrangement with ``Jesus as the Christ'', the norm tells us that we find the New Being in Jesus as the Christ. 
There is also the question of the validity of the method of correlation. 
Certainly one could reject the method on the grounds that there is no ``a priori'' reason for its adoption. 
But Tillich claims that the method of any theology and its system are interdependent. 
That is, an absolute methodological approach cannot be adopted because the method is continually being determined by the system and the objects of theology. 
Tillich used the concept of ``being'' in systematic theology. 
There are three roles : This is part four of Tillich's ``Systematic Theology''. 
In this part, Tillich talks about life and the divine Spirit. 
Tillich stated the courage to take meaninglessness into oneself presupposes a relation to the ground of being: absolute faith. 
Absolute faith can transcend the theistic idea of God, and has three elements. 
According to the ``Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy'', Tillich believes the essence of religious attitudes is what he calls ``ultimate concern''. 
Separate from all profane and ordinary realities, the object of the concern is understood as sacred, numinous or holy. 
The perception of its reality is felt as so overwhelming and valuable that all else seems insignificant, and for this reason requires total surrender. 
In 1957, Tillich defined his conception of faith more explicitly in his work, ``Dynamics of Faith''. 
An arguably central component of Tillich's concept of faith is his notion that faith is ``ecstatic''. 
That is to say: In short, for Tillich, faith does not stand opposed to rational or nonrational elements reason and emotion respectively, as some philosophers would maintain. 
Rather, it ``transcends'' them in an ecstatic passion for the ultimate. 
It should also be noted that Tillich does not exclude atheists in his exposition of faith. 
Everyone has an ultimate concern, and this concern can be in an act of faith, ``even if the act of faith includes the denial of God. 
Where there is ultimate concern, God can be denied only in the name of God'' Throughout most of his works Paul Tillich provides an apologetic and alternative ontological view of God. 
Traditional medieval philosophical theology in the work of figures such as St. Anselm, Duns Scotus, and William of Ockham tended to understand God as the highest existing Being, to which predicates such as omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence, goodness, righteousness, holiness, etc. may be ascribed. 
Arguments for and against the existence of God presuppose such an understanding of God. 
Tillich is critical of this mode of discourse which he refers to as ``theological theism,'' and argues that if God is a Being Seiende, even if the highest Being, God cannot be properly called the source of all being, and the question can of course then be posed as to why God exists, who created God, when God's beginning is, and so on. 
To put the issue in traditional language: if God is a being Seiende, then God is a creature, even if the highest one, and thus cannot be the Creator. 
Rather, God must be understood as the ``ground of Being-Itself''. 
The problem persists in the same way when attempting to determine whether God is an eternal essence, or an existing being, neither of which are adequate, as traditional theology was well aware. 
When God is understood in this way, it becomes clear that not only is it impossible to argue for the ``existence'' of God, since God is beyond the distinction between essence and existence, but it is also foolish: one cannot deny that there is being, and thus there is a Power of Being. 
The question then becomes whether and in what way personal language about God and humanity's relationship to God is appropriate. 
In distinction to ``theological theism'', Tillich refers to another kind of theism as that of the ``divine-human encounter''. 
Such is the theism of the encounter with the ``Wholly Other'' ``Das ganz Andere'', as in the work of Karl Barth and Rudolf Otto, and implies a personalism with regard to God's self-revelation. 
Tillich is quite clear that this is both appropriate and necessary, as it is the basis of the personalism of Biblical Religion altogether and the concept of the ``Word of God'', but can become falsified if the theologian tries to turn such encounters with God as the Wholly Other into an understanding of God as a being. 
In other words, God is both personal and transpersonal. 
Tillich's ontological view of God has precedent in Christian theology. 
Many theologians, especially those in the Hellenistic or Patristic period of Christianity's history that corresponds with the Church Fathers, understood God as the ``unoriginate source'' agennetosof all being. 
This view was espoused in particular by Origen, one of a number of early theologians whose thought influenced that of Tillich. 
Their views in turn had pre-Christian precedents in middle Platonism. 
Tillich further argues that theological theism is not only logically problematic, but is unable to speak into the situation of radical doubt and despair about meaning in life. 
This issue, he said, was of primary concern in the modern age, as opposed to anxiety about fate, guilt, death and condemnation. 
This is because the state of finitude entails by necessity anxiety, and that it is our finitude as human beings, our being a mixture of being and nonbeing, that is at the ultimate basis of anxiety. 
If God is not the ground of being itself, then God cannot provide an answer to the question of finitude; God would also be finite in some sense. 
The term ``God Above God,'' then, means to indicate the God who appears, who is the ground of being itself, when the ``God'' of theological theism has disappeared in the anxiety of doubt. 
While on the one hand this God goes beyond the God of theism as usually defined, it finds expression in many religious symbols of the Christian faith, particularly that of the crucified Christ. 
The possibility thus exists, says Tillich, that religious symbols may be recovered which would otherwise have been rendered ineffective by contemporary society. 
Tillich argues that the God of theological theism is at the root of much revolt against theism and religious faith in the modern period. 
Tillich states, sympathetically, that the God of theological theism Another reason Tillich criticized theological theism was because it placed God into the subject-object dichotomy. 
This is the basic distinction made in Epistemology, that branch of Philosophy which deals with human knowledge, how it is possible, what it is, and its limits. 
``Epistemologically'', God cannot be made into an object, that is, an object of the knowing subject. 
Tillich deals with this question under the rubric of the relationality of God. 
The question is ``whether there are external relations between God and the creature''. 
Traditionally Christian theology has always understood the doctrine of creation to mean precisely this external relationality between God, the Creator, and the creature as separate and not identical realities. 
Tillich reminds us of the point, which can be found in Luther, that ``there is no place to which man can withdraw from the divine thou, because it includes the ego and is nearer to the ego than the ego to itself''. 
Tillich goes further to say that the desire to draw God into the subject-object dichotomy is an ``insult'' to the divine holiness. 
Similarly, if God were made into the subject rather than the object of knowledge The Ultimate Subject, then the rest of existing entities then become subjected to the absolute knowledge and scrutiny of God, and the human being is ``reified,'' or made into a mere object. 
It would deprive the person of his or her own subjectivity and creativity. 
According to Tillich, theological theism has provoked the rebellions found in atheism and Existentialism, although other social factors such as the industrial revolution have also contributed to the ``reification'' of the human being. 
The modern man could no longer tolerate the idea of being an ``object'' completely subjected to the absolute knowledge of God. 
Tillich argued, as mentioned, that theological theism is ``bad theology''. 
Alternatively, Tillich presents the above-mentioned ontological view of God as Being-Itself, Ground of Being, Power of Being, and occasionally as Abyss or God's ``Abysmal Being''. 
What makes Tillich's ontological view of God different from theological theism is that it transcends it by being the foundation or ultimate reality that ``precedes'' all beings. 
Just as Being for Heidegger is ontologically ``prior'' to conception, Tillich views God to be beyond Being-Itself, manifested in the structure of beings. 
God is not a supernatural entity among other entities. 
Instead, God is the ground upon which all beings exist. 
We cannot perceive God as an object which is related to a subject because God ``precedes'' the subject-object dichotomy. 
Thus Tillich dismisses a literalistic Biblicism. 
Instead of rejecting the notion of personal God, however, Tillich sees it as a symbol that points directly to the Ground of Being. 
Since the Ground of Being ontologically precedes reason, it cannot be comprehended since comprehension presupposes the subject-object dichotomy. 
Tillich disagreed with any literal philosophical and religious statements that can be made about God. 
Such literal statements attempt to define God and lead not only to anthropomorphism but also to a philosophical mistake that Immanuel Kant warned against, that setting limits against the transcendent inevitably leads to contradictions. 
Any statements about God are simply symbolic, but these symbols are sacred in the sense that they function to participate or point to the Ground of Being. 
Tillich insists that anyone who participates in these symbols is empowered by the Power of Being, which overcomes and conquers nonbeing and meaninglessness. 
Tillich also further elaborated the thesis of the God above the God of theism in his Systematic Theology. 
In Paul Tillich's work ``The Courage to Be'' he defines courage as the self-affirmation of one's being in spite of a threat of nonbeing. 
He relates courage to anxiety, anxiety being the threat of non-being and the courage to be what we use to combat that threat. 
For Tillich, he outlines three types of anxiety and thus three ways to display the courage to be. 
a. 
The Anxiety of Fate and Death is the most basic and universal form of anxiety for Tillich. 
It relates quite simply to the recognition of our mortality. 
This troubles us humans. 
We become anxious when we are unsure whether our actions create a causal damnation which leads to a very real an unavoidable death 42-44. 
``Nonbeing threatens man's ontic self-affirmation, relatively in terms of fate, absolutely in terms of death'' 41. 
b. 
We display courage when we cease to rely on others to tell us what will come of us, what will happen when we die etc.and begin seeking those answers out for ourselves. 
Called the ``courage of confidence'' 162-63. 
a. 
This anxiety afflicts our moral self-affirmation. 
We as humans are responsible for our moral being, and when asked by our judge whomever that may bewhat we have made of ourselves we must answer. 
The anxiety is produced when we realize our being is unsatisfactory. 
``It threatens man's moral self-affirmation, relatively in terms of guilt, absolutely in terms of condemnation'' 41. 
b. 
We display courage when we first identify our sin; despair or whatever is causing us guilt or afflicting condemnation. 
We then rely on the idea that we are accepted regardless. 
``The courage to be is the courage to accept oneself as accepted in spite of being unacceptable'' 164. 
a. 
The Anxiety of Meaninglessness and Emptiness attacks our being as a whole. 
We worry about the loss of an ultimate concern or goal. 
This anxiety is also brought on by a loss of spirituality. 
We as beings feel the threat of non-being when we feel we have no place or purpose in the world. 
``It threatens man's spiritual self-affirmation, relatively in terms of emptiness, absolutely in terms of meaninglessness'' 41. 
b. 
We display the courage to be when facing this anxiety by displaying true faith, and by again, self-affirming oneself. 
We draw from the ``power of being'' which is God for Tillich and use that faith to in turn affirm ourselves and negate the non-being. 
We can find our meaning and purpose through the ``power of being'' 172-73. 
Tillich writes that the ultimate source of the courage to be is the ``God above God,'' which transcends the theistic idea of God and is the content of absolute faith defined as ``the accepting of the acceptance without somebody or something that accepts''185. 
Two of Tillich's works, ``The Courage to Be'' 1952and ``Dynamics of Faith'' 1957, were read widely, including by people who would not normally read religious books. 
In ``The Courage to Be'', he lists three basic anxieties: anxiety about our biological finitude, i.e. that arising from the knowledge that we will eventually die; anxiety about our moral finitude, linked to guilt; and anxiety about our existential finitude, a sense of aimlessness in life. 
Tillich related these to three different historical eras: the early centuries of the Christian era; the Reformation; and the 20th century. 
Tillich's popular works have influenced psychology as well as theology, having had an influence on Rollo May, whose ``The Courage to Create'' was inspired by ``The Courage to Be''. 
Today, Tillich's most observable legacy may well be that of a spiritually-oriented public intellectual and teacher with a broad and continuing range of influence. 
Tillich`s chapel sermons especially at Unionwere enthusiastically received Tillich was known as the only faculty member of his day at Union willing to attend the revivals of Billy Graham.
Tillich's students have commented on Tillich's approachability as a lecturer and his need for interaction with his audience. 
When Tillich was University Professor at Harvard, he was chosen as keynote speaker from among an auspicious gathering of many who had appeared on the cover of Time Magazine during its first four decades. 
Tillich along with his student, psychologist Rollo May, was an early leader at the Esalen Institute. 
Contemporary New Age catchphrases describing God spatiallyas the ``Ground of Being'' and temporallyas the ``Eternal Now,'' in tandem with the view that God is not an entity among entities but rather is ``Being-Itself''--notions which Eckhart Tolle, for example, has invoked repeatedly throughout his career--were paradigmatically renovated by Tillich, although of course these ideas derive from Christian mystical sources as well as from ancient and medieval theologians such as St. Augustine and St. Thomas Aquinas. 
The introductory philosophy course taught by the person Tillich considered to be his best student, John E. Smith philosopher, ``probably turned more undergraduates to the study of philosophy at Yale than all the other philosophy courses put together. 
His courses in philosophy of religion and American philosophy defined those fields for many years. 
Perhaps most important of all, he has educated a younger generation in the importance of the public life in philosophy and in how to practice philosophy publicly.'' 
In the 1980s and 1990s the Boston University Institute for Philosophy and Religion, a leading forum dedicated to the revival of the American public tradition of philosophy and religion, flourished under the leadership of Tillich's student and expositor Leroy S. Rouner. 
Martin Buber criticized Tillich's ``transtheistic position'' as a reduction of God to the impersonal ``necessary being'' of Thomas Aquinas. 
Tillich has been criticized from the Barthian wing of Protestantism for what is alleged to be correlation theory's tendency to reduce God and his relationship to man to anthropocentric terms. 
Tillich counters that Barth's approach to theology denies the ``possibility of understanding God's relation to man in any other way than heteronomously or extrinsically''. 
Defenders of Tillich claim that critics misunderstand the distinction Tillich makes between God's essence as the unconditional ``das unbedingte''``Ground of Being'' which is unknowable, and how God reveals himself to mankind in existence. 
Tillich establishes the distinction in the first chapter of his ``Systematic Theology Volume One:'' ``But though God in his abysmal nature -LSB-``footnote: `Calvin: in his essence' '' -RSB- is in no way dependent on man, God in his self manifestation to man is dependent on the way man receives his manifestation.'' 
Some conservative strains of Evangelical Christianity believe Tillich's thought is too unorthodox to qualify as Christianity at all, but rather as a form of pantheism or atheism. 
The ``Evangelical Dictionary of Theology'' states, ``At best Tillich was a pantheist, but his thought borders on atheism.''
