Angelo Pirotta, O.P. December 27, 1894 -- November 16, 1956was a major Maltese philosopher. 
His areas of specialisation in philosophy were chiefly epistemology and metaphysics. 
Pirotta was born at Naxxar, Malta. 
Even if his family lived hand to mouth, he was the first of thirteen children, three of whom died in infancy. 
Pirotta was first privately schooled by Canon Fortunato De Bono. 
Later, he eventually enrolled on a regular course at the government-owned high school for boys the Lyceumat Valletta. 
He completed the course at the Lyceum up till the age of sixteen. 
Thereafter, he joined the Dominicans almost immediately, on April 30, 1911. 
At Rabat, together with his companions, Pirotta began his novitiate, and then, a year later, made his simple three-yearprofession on May 12, 1912. 
Thereafter, he began his institutional studies; three years of philosophy 1912--15, and four of theology 1915--19, of course all according to the tradition. 
He made his religious profession on May 11, 1915. 
After completing his second year of theology 1916/17, Pirotta was chosen to continue his theological studies at Pontifical International Angelicum College in Rome, the future Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas, ``Angelicum''. 
In the meantime, he was ordained a priest by on September 22, 1917, at the St. John's Co-Cathedral, Valletta, Malta. 
In Rome Pirotta resided at the Angelicum College itself. 
After his two years of theology 1917--19, on July 1, 1919, he successfully set for his Lectorate exams with a dissertation entitled De Reali Distinctione inter Essentiam et Esse in Creatis The Real Distinction between Essence and Existence in Created Being. 
Thereafter, he proceeded with his post-graduate studies in philosophy 1919--21. 
Meanwhile, he also prepared his doctorate thesis, entitled De Supposto et Persona, which he successfully defended on, July 1, 1921. 
Pirotta's first academic assignment was at Viterbo. 
Here he spent five academic years 1921--26, teaching history of philosophy, natural science also called `physics', and theodicy ``theologia fundamentalis''; now called natural theology. 
Here he was frequently invited to address the ``Circulus Philosophicus'' Philosophical Discussion Group, and was also asked to contribute to prestigious Thomistic periodicals, read sermons, and give speeches. 
At Viterbo, Pirotta also prepared his first major publication, and frankly his most successful composition to date: an exposition of Aquinas' commentary on Aristotle's De Anima On the Soul. 
After Viterbo, Pirotta returned to Rome to assume a teaching post at the Angelicum College. 
Here Pirotta remained for just two years 1926-28, teaching philosophy, theodicy, logic, and ontology. 
In terms of literary production, Pirotta's Roman years correspond to a very prolific and industrious period. 
He wrote reviews, scientific articles, and even prepared and published his second major work: another exposition on Aquinas' commentaries on Aristotle's De Sensu et Sensato On Sense and Sensibilityand De Memoria et Reminiscientia On Memory and Remembrance. 
In 1928 Pirotta had to retire momentarily to his homeland since his family was in dire straits. 
One of his brothers became seriously ill, and his mother was ill and dying. 
She succumbed on July 5, 1929. 
In Malta Pirotta spent two academic years 1928--30, residing and lecturing at Rabat, Malta. 
More or less as usual, Pirotta read philosophy, the history of philosophy, and apologetics. 
He also continued to publish steadily, especially scientific reviews and articles. 
Back in Italy, Pirotta was sent to College of Fiesole, near Florence, Italy. 
The college here was not a public one, but the academic institution that prepared Dominican students for the priesthood. 
Pirotta stayed here for just one academic year 1930/31, reading the history of philosophy, and the treatise on divine revelation. 
Here he also worked upon the first of his six-volumed ``Summa Philosophæ'' The Sum of Philosophy, which he published in 1931. 
He also prepared for his Masters. 
The final exam was successfully held on May 7, 1931, in Rome at the Angelicum College, which by that time had been upgraded to the status of an international university. 
As was the usual practice, the title was conferred four years later. 
The official investiture was held at the Dominican Priory at Rabat, Malta on November 24, 1935. 
After Tuscany came Naples. 
Here, at the Aquinas College of the Dominicans, Pirotta did not go simply as a lecturer, but as a Rector ''`Lectorem Primarium'''. 
He stayed here for three consecutive academic years 1931--34. 
At Naples, Pirotta may be considered to have been at the peak of his academic career. 
At the beginning of his experience there he published the first of his planned six-volumed ``Summa Philosophæ'': a study about Aristotelico-Thomistic logic, called the Philosophia Rationalis Rational Philosophy. 
Later, he proceeded to publish his third exposition: this time of Aquinas' commentary on Aristotle's Ethicorum ad Nichomachum Nichomachean Ethics. 
In 1934, Pirotta was recalled to Malta, at Rabat, Malta. 
During the first academic year 1934/35he was just a lecturer of philosophy. 
In the following year, however, he was chosen to be the Rector of the college. 
He retained this office for nine years, up till 1944, which included the worst of the World War II years in Malta. 
At the beginning of the 1935/36 academic year, Pirotta was officially conferred with his Masters. 
A few months later, he issued his second volume of the ``Summa Philosophiæ'', the one dealing with natural philosophy, and called Philosophia Naturalis. 
In 1938 Pirotta applied for the Deanship of philosophy at the Royal University of Malta. 
Though unmatched or much less unsurpassed by any other contender, he lost the competition nonetheless. 
Though he took the rebuff most gracefully, Pirotta decided to make some drastic changes to his life. 
Thus, from 1939 onwards, right up to his death, he lived the larger part of his days at Naxxar, staying at his convent at Rabat, Malta only as little as possible. 
At Rabat, Malta Pirotta was still the Rector, and still read philosophy at the college there. 
Also from 1939 onwards, he acted as supplementary examiner at the Royal University of Malta. 
He further continued to deliver sermons here and there, and even to hear confessions on a regular basis. 
Before the war was over, at the end of the academic year of 1943/44, Pirotta -- now almost fifty years of age -- was relieved of the post of Rector at Rabat, Malta. 
During these years he assiduously worked on his next publication, which eventually had to be his last. 
This was his fourth exposition, the one on Aquinas' eight books of commentaries on Aristotle's De Physico Auditu Physics. 
It was published in 1953. 
One fatal day in the latter part of 1955, Pirotta became victim of acute cerebral vascular insufficiency due to diabetes and chronic smoking. 
As a result, his memory had become seriously impaired, and so was his reasoning powers. 
He died at his parents' home at Naxxar on November 16, 1956, a month short of his sixty-second birthday, and buried in the Dominican church of Our Lady of the Grotto at Rabat, Malta. 
The commentaries would represent the main output for a Thomistic intellectual with which he really shows his mettle. 
Apart of Pirotta's two published volumes that were part of his ``Summa Philosophiæ Aristotelico-Thomisticæ'', published in 1931 and 1936 respectively, these commentaries--especially the first on the ``De Anima''--were in fact the intellectual productions that effectively brought Pirotta most renown. 
Unlike the commentaries, these articles take up some point or aspect of a particular theme on which Pirotta expands upon. 
With the exception of the very early ones, published by Pirotta when still at the beginning of his career, the rest are master works that would have been minuely scrutinized by the editorial boards concerned before publication, and furthermore exposed Pirotta's intellect to a wide readership within international Thomistic academic circles. 
After publication, almost all of these articles had been subsequently distributed as separate extracts. 
The following reviews, though interesting in themselves, contain little philosophical value. 
What they do attest to is the standing Pirotta enjoyed with the various editors of the respective scientific journals who had valued Pirotta's proficiency enough so as to consider him an academic and intellectual worthy of passing authoritative judgement on the writings of other reputed Thomists. 
Pirotta does not disappoint. 
He showers praise when earned, but certainly does not shy away from lashing out when warranted. 
Pirotta's manuscripts are invaluable documents, as they attest to his background operational activities, and moreover to the keenness and responsibility with which he undertook any commitment, especially those of a philosophical nature. 
Most of the following texts are incomplete, as Pirotta had not as yet given them their final finishing. 
To some he surely intended to add on other material. 
Nonetheless, even as they stand, these documents can be taken as reliable attestations to Pirotta's proficiency of labour, and intensity of thought. 
The following list of notes are working annotations prepared by Pirotta for various publications, academic talks, or lectures, over an extended period of time. 
All of them are undated. 
Some of them had been grouped by Pirotta under the title ''`Studia Philosophica''' Philosophical Studies. 
Their philosophical interest is not to be undervalued. 
While some of the documents hereunder are full written drafts, others are just elaborate schemes of branches of Aristotelico-Thomistic philosophy. 
The following written texts are full transcripts of talks read by Pirotta on various occasions at the several academic institutes, both in Malta and in Italy, that he was part of. 
None of them have ever been published. 
The following texts are the extant sermons that Pirotta read during his pastoral work. 
All of them have been probably delivered in Malta, even the Italian ones. 
Roughly speaking, the Italian orations would have been read to diocesan priests or members of religious orders, and the Maltese ones to the general faithful. 
Though most of them do not contain any philosophical interest, some of them do bear witness to Pirotta's philosophical type of mind, even when treating spiritual or religious matters. 
Pirotta's extant sermons in Italian are all collected at the Dominican archives at Rabat, Malta. 
Most of the titles are Pirotta's own. 
Pirotta's extant sermons in Maltese are collected in separate groups of manuscripts as indicated. 
They are all kept at the Dominican archives at Rabat, Malta. 
The titles are generally Pirotta's own. 
Pirotta was the last of major philosophers within the school of Scholasticism. 
With him, an era of Scholastics, extending back to the latter part of the 16th century, starting with John Matthew Rispoli, came to an end. 
Today, as philosophy took new shapes and adopted different language-forms, Pirotta might appear almost incomprehensible in his world-view and philosophical method. 
This is further intensified his consistent use of Latin, a language very few still remember how to use or read. 
Though a great speculative thinker, it is somewhat difficult to gauge Pirotta's originality. 
Surely his lack of concrete commitment with things social and political, as any old-time, first division scholastic would be, today makes him suspect of a certain lack of concern for world affairs as for the fate of humans. 
However, the scholastics had another way of understanding what philosophical service to humankind should be. 
Arguably, they sought to enlighten the highest or most profoundaspects of reason, there where the quality of life might be improved and perfected. 
Much work is still needed to continue discovering the wealth which philosophers of the calibre of Pirotta possessed.
