The 14th Dalai Lama religious name: Tenzin Gyatso, shortened from Jetsun Jamphel Ngawang Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso, born Lhamo Dondrub, 6 July 1935is the current Dalai Lama, as well as the longest-lived incumbent. 
Dalai Lamas are amongst the head monks of the Gelug school, the newest of the schools of Tibetan Buddhism. 
He won the Nobel Peace Prize in 1989, and is also well known for his lifelong advocacy for Tibetans inside and outside Tibet. 
The Dalai Lama was born in Taktser, Qinghai known to Tibetans as Amdo, and was selected as the tulku of the 13th Dalai Lama two years later, although he was only formally recognized as the 14th Dalai Lama on 17 November 1950, at the age of 15. 
The Gelug school's government administered an area roughly corresponding to the Tibet Autonomous Region just as the nascent People's Republic of China wished to assert central control over it. 
There is a dispute over whether the respective governments reached an agreement for a joint Chinese-Tibetan administration. 
During the 1959 Tibetan uprising, the Dalai Lama fled to India, where he denounced the People's Republic and established the nongovernmental Central Tibetan Administration. 
He has since traveled the world, advocating for the welfare of Tibetans, teaching Tibetan Buddhism and talking about the importance of compassion as the source of a happy life. 
Around the world, institutions face pressure from China not to accept him. 
The current policy of the Dalai Lama is that he does not seek sovereignty for Tibet, but would accept Tibet as a genuine autonomous region within the People's Republic of China. 
He has spoken about the environment, economics, women's rights, non-violence, interfaith dialog, physics, astronomy, reproductive health, and sexuality, along with various Mahayana and Vajrayana topics. 
Lhamo Döndrub or ``Thondup''was born on 6 July 1935 to a farming and horse trading family in the small hamlet of Taktser, at the edges of the traditional Tibetan region of Amdo, which was politically part of the Chinese province of Qinghai. 
His family was of Monguor extraction. 
He was one of seven siblings to survive childhood. 
The eldest was his sister Tsering Dolma, eighteen years older. 
His eldest brother, Thupten Jigme Norbu, had been recognised at the age of eight as the reincarnation of the high Lama Taktser Rinpoche. 
His sister, Jetsun Pema, spent most of her adult life on the Tibetan Children's Villages project. 
The Dalai Lama's first language was, in his own words, ``a broken Xining language which was a dialect ofthe Chinese language'' as his family did not speak the Tibetan language. 
A search party was sent to locate the new incarnation when the boy who was to become the 14th was about two years old. 
It is said that, amongst other omens, the head of the embalmed body of the thirteenth Dalai Lama, at first facing south-east, had mysteriously turned to face the northeast--indicating the direction in which his successor would be found. 
The Regent, Reting Rinpoche, shortly afterwards had a vision at the sacred lake of Lhamo La-tso indicating Amdo as the region to search--specifically a one-story house with distinctive guttering and tiling. 
After extensive searching, the Thondup house, with its features resembling those in Reting's vision, was finally found. 
Thondup was presented with various relics, including toys, some of which had belonged to the 13th Dalai Lama and some of which had not. 
It was reported that he had correctly identified all the items owned by the previous Dalai Lama, exclaiming, ``It's mine! 
It's mine!'' 
The Chinese General Ma Bufang did not want the 14th Dalai Lama to succeed his predecessor. 
Ma Bufang stationed his men to place the Dalai Lama under effective house arrest, saying it was needed for ``protection'', refusing to permit his leaving to Tibet. 
He did all he could to delay the transport of the Dalai Lama from Qinghai to Tibet, by demanding massive sums of money in silver. 
The demanded payment by Ma Bufang was 100,000 Chinese silver dollars. 
Lhamo Thondup was recognised formally as the reincarnated Dalai Lama and renamed Jetsun Jamphel Ngawang Lobsang Yeshe Tenzin Gyatso ``Holy Lord, Gentle Glory, Compassionate, Defender of the Faith, Ocean of Wisdom''although he was not formally enthroned as the Dalai Lama until the age of 15; instead, the regent acted as the head of the Kashag until that time. 
Tibetan Buddhists normally refer to him as Yishin Norbu ``Wish-Fulfilling Gem'', Kyabgon ``Saviour'', or just Kundun ``Presence''. 
His devotees, as well as much of the Western world, often call him ``His Holiness the Dalai Lama'', the style employed on the Dalai Lama's website. 
According to the Dalai Lama, he had a succession of tutors in Tibet including Reting Rinpoche, Tathag Rinpoche, Ling Rinpoche and lastly Trijang Rinpoche, who became junior tutor when he was nineteen. 
At the age of 11 he met the Austrian mountaineer Heinrich Harrer, who became his videographer and tutor about the world outside Lhasa. 
The two remained friends until Harrer's death in 2006. 
In 1959, at the age of 23, he took his final examination at Lhasa's Jokhang Temple during the annual Monlam or Prayer Festival. 
He passed with honours and was awarded the Lharampa degree, the highest-level ``geshe'' degree, roughly equivalent to a doctorate in Buddhist philosophy. 
Historically the Dalai Lamas had political and religious influence in the Western Tibetan area of Ü-Tsang around Lhasa, where the Gelug school of Tibetan Buddhism was popular, and the Dalai Lamas held land under their jurisdiction. 
In 1939, at the age of four, the present Dalai Lama was taken in a procession of lamas to Lhasa. 
The Dalai Lama's childhood was spent between the Potala Palace and Norbulingka, his summer residence, both of which are now UNESCO World Heritage Sites. 
China asserts that the Kuomintang government ratified the 14th Dalai Lama and that a Kuomintang representative, General Wu Zhongxin, presided over the ceremony. 
It cites a ratification order dated February 1940 and a documentary film of the ceremony. 
According to Tsering Shakya, Wu Zhongxin along with other foreign representatives was present at the ceremony, but there is no evidence that he presided over it. 
He also wrote: During his reign, a border crisis erupted with the Republic of China in 1942. 
Under orders from the Kuomintang government of Chiang Kai-shek, Ma Bufang repaired Yushu airport to prevent Tibetan separatists from seeking independence. 
Chiang also ordered Ma Bufang to put his Muslim soldiers on alert for an invasion of Tibet in 1942. 
Ma Bufang complied, and moved several thousand troops to the border with Tibet. 
Chiang also threatened the Tibetans with aerial bombardment if they worked with the Japanese. 
Ma Bufang attacked the Tibetan Buddhist Tsang monastery in 1941. 
He also constantly attacked the Labrang monastery. 
In October 1950 the army of the People's Republic of China marched to the edge of the Dalai Lama's territory and sent a delegation after defeating a legion of the Tibetan army in warlord-controlled Kham. 
On 17 November 1950, at the age of 15, the 14th Dalai Lama was enthroned formally as the temporal ruler of Tibet. 
The Dalai Lama's formal rule was brief. 
He sent a delegation to Beijing, which ratified the Seventeen Point Agreement for the Peaceful Liberation of Tibet. 
He worked with the Chinese government: in September 1954, together with the 10th Panchen Lama he went to the Chinese capital to meet Mao Zedong and attend the first session of the National People's Congress as a delegate, primarily discussing China's constitution. 
On 27 September 1954, the Dalai Lama was selected as a deputy chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, a post he officially held until 1964. 
In 1956, on a trip to India to celebrate the Buddha's Birthday, the Dalai Lama asked the Prime Minister of India, Jawaharlal Nehru, if he would allow him political asylum should he choose to stay. 
Nehru discouraged this as a provocation against peace, and reminded him of the Indian Government's non-interventionist stance agreed upon with its 1954 treaty with China. 
The CIA, with the Korean War only recently over, offered the Dalai Lama assistance. 
In 1956, a large rebellion broke out in eastern Kham, an ethnically Tibetan region in Sichuan province. 
To support the rebels, the CIA launched a covert action campaign against the Communist Chinese. 
A secret military training camp for the Khampa guerrillas was established at Camp Hale near Leadville, Colorado, in the U.S.. 
The guerrillas attacked Communist forces in Amdo and Kham but were gradually pushed into Central Tibet. 
At the outset of the 1959 Tibetan uprising, fearing for his life, the Dalai Lama and his retinue fled Tibet with the help of the CIA's Special Activities Division, crossing into India on 30 March 1959, reaching Tezpur in Assam on 18 April. 
Some time later he set up the Government of Tibet in Exile in Dharamshala, India, which is often referred to as ''``Little Lhasa''''. 
After the founding of the government in exile he re-established the approximately 80,000 Tibetan refugees who followed him into exile in agricultural settlements. 
He created a Tibetan educational system in order to teach the Tibetan children the language, history, religion, and culture. 
The Tibetan Institute of Performing Arts was established in 1959 and the Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies became the primary university for Tibetans in India in 1967. 
He supported the refounding of 200 monasteries and nunneries in an attempt to preserve Tibetan Buddhist teachings and the Tibetan way of life. 
The Dalai Lama appealed to the United Nations on the rights of Tibetans. 
This appeal resulted in three resolutions adopted by the General Assembly in 1959, 1961, and 1965, all before the People's Republic was allowed representation at the United Nations. 
The resolutions called on China to respect the human rights of Tibetans. 
In 1963, he promulgated a democratic constitution which is based upon the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, creating an elected parliament and an administration to champion his cause. 
In 1970, he opened the Library of Tibetan Works and Archives in Dharamshala which houses over 80,000 manuscripts and important knowledge resources related to Tibetan history, politics and culture. 
It is considered one of the most important institutions for Tibetology in the world. 
At the Congressional Human Rights Caucus in 1987 in Washington, D.C., the Dalai Lama gave a speech outlining his ideas for the future status of Tibet. 
The plan called for Tibet to become a democratic ``zone of peace'' without nuclear weapons, and with support for human rights, that barred the entry of Han Chinese. 
The plan would come to be known as the ``Strasbourg proposal'', because the Dalai Lama expanded on the plan at Strasbourg on 15 June 1988. 
There, he proposed the creation of a self-governing Tibet ``in association with the People's Republic of China.'' 
This would have been pursued by negotiations with the PRC government, but the plan was rejected by the Tibetan Government-in-Exile in 1991. 
The Dalai Lama has indicated that he wishes to return to Tibet only if the People's Republic of China agrees not to make any precondition for his return. 
In the 1970s, the then-Paramount leader Deng Xiaoping set China's sole return requirement to the Dalai Lama as that he ``must back as a Chinese citizen... that is, patriotism''. 
The Dalai Lama celebrated his seventieth birthday on 6 July 2005. 
About 10,000 Tibetan refugees, monks and foreign tourists gathered outside his home. 
Patriarch Alexius II of the Russian Orthodox Church affirmed positive relations with Buddhists. 
Then President of the Republic of China Taiwan, Chen Shui-bian, attended an evening celebrating the Dalai Lama's birthday at the Chiang Kai-shek Memorial Hall in Taipei. 
In October 2008 in Japan, the Dalai Lama addressed the 2008 Tibetan violence that had erupted and that the Chinese government accused him of fomenting. 
He responded that he had ``lost faith'' in efforts to negotiate with the Chinese government, and that it was ``up to the Tibetan people'' to decide what to do. 
The Dalai Lama has conducted numerous public initiations in the Kalachakra, and is the author of many books, including books on the topic of Dzogchen, a practice in which he is accomplished. 
His teaching activities in the U.S. include the following: In February 2007, the Dalai Lama was named ``Presidential Distinguished Professor'' at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia; it was the first time that he accepted a university appointment. 
On his April 2008 U.S. tour, he gave lectures at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, at Rutgers University New Jerseyand Colgate University New YorkLater in July, the Dalai Lama gave a public lecture and conducted a series of teachings at Lehigh University Pennsylvania. 
On May 8, 2011, the University of Minnesota bestowed upon him their highest award, an Honorary Doctor of Letters. 
During a return trip to Minnesota on March 2, 2014, he spoke at Macalester College which awarded him an honorary Doctor of Humane Letters degree. 
The Dalai Lama met with Pope Paul VI at the Vatican in 1973. 
He met with Pope John Paul II in 1980, 1982, 1986, 1988, 1990, and 2003. 
In 1990, he met in Dharamshala with a delegation of Jewish teachers for an extensive interfaith dialogue. 
He has since visited Israel three times and met during 2006 with the Chief Rabbi of Israel. 
In 2006, he met privately with Pope Benedict XVI. 
He has met with the Archbishop of Canterbury, Dr. Robert Runcie, and other leaders of the Anglican Church in London, Gordon B. Hinckley, who at the time was the president of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Mormons, as well as senior Eastern Orthodox Church, Muslim, Hindu, Jewish, and Sikh officials. 
The Dalai Lama is also currently a member of the Board of World Religious Leaders as part of The Elijah Interfaith Institute and participated in the Third Meeting of the Board of World Religious Leaders in Amritsar, India, on 26 November 2007 to discuss the topic of Love and Forgiveness. 
On 6 January 2009, at Gujarat's Mahuva, the Dalai Lama inaugurated an interfaith ``World Religions-Dialogue and Symphony'' conference convened by Hindu preacher Morari Bapu. 
This conference explored ``ways and means to deal with the discord among major religions'', according to Morari Bapu. 
He has stated that modern scientific findings should take precedence where appropriate over disproven religious superstition. 
On 12 May 2010, in Bloomington, Indiana USAthe Dalai Lama, joined by a panel of select scholars, officially launched the Common Ground Project, which he and Prince Ghazi bin Muhammad of Jordan had planned over the course of several years of personal conversations. 
The project is based on the book ``Common Ground between Islam and Buddhism''. 
The Dalai Lama has shown a nuanced and relatively flexible position on abortion. 
He explained that, from the perspective of the Buddhist precepts, abortion is an act of killing. 
He has also clarified that in certain cases abortion could be considered ethically acceptable ``if the unborn child will be retarded or if the birth will create serious problems for the parent'', which could only be determined on a case-by-case basis. 
The Dalai Lama says that he is active in spreading India's message of non-violence and religious harmony throughout the world. 
``I am the messenger of India's ancient thoughts the world over.'' 
He has said that democracy has deep roots in India. 
He says he considers India the master and Tibet its disciple, as great scholars like Nagarjuna went from Nalanda to Tibet to preach Buddhism in the eighth century. 
He has noted that millions of people lost their lives in violence and the economies of many countries were ruined due to conflicts in the 20th century. 
``Let the 21st century be a century of tolerance and dialogue.'' 
In 1993, the Dalai Lama attended the World Conference on Human Rights and made a speech titled ``Human Rights and Universal Responsibility''. 
In 2001, he answered the question of a girl in a Seattle school by saying that it is permissible to shoot someone with a gun in self-defense if that person was ``trying to kill you,'' and he emphasized that the shot should not be fatal. 
In May 2013, the Dalai Lama openly criticised Buddhist monks' attacks on Muslims in Myanmar saying ``Really, killing people in the name of religion is unthinkable, very sad.'' 
The Dalai Lama advocates compassion for animals and frequently urges people to try vegetarianism or at least reduce their consumption of meat. 
In Tibet, where historically meat was the most common food, most monks historically have been omnivores, including the Dalai Lamas. 
The Fourteenth Dalai Lama was raised in a meat-eating family but converted to vegetarianism after arriving in India, where vegetables are much more easily available. 
He spent many years as a vegetarian, but after contracting hepatitis in India and suffering from weakness, his doctors ordered him to eat meat on alternating days, which he did for several years. 
He tried switching back to a vegetarian diet, but once again returned to limited consumption of meat. 
This attracted public attention when, during a visit to the White House, he was offered a vegetarian menu but declined by replying, as he is known to do on occasion when dining in the company of non-vegetarians, ``I'm a Tibetan monk, not a vegetarian''. 
His own home kitchen, however, is completely vegetarian. 
The Dalai Lama has referred to himself as a Marxist and has articulated criticisms of capitalism. 
He reports hearing of communism when he was very young, but only in the context of the destruction of Communist Mongolia. 
It was only when he went on his trip to Beijing that he learned about Marxist theory from his interpreter Baba Phuntsog Wangyal. 
At that time, he reports, ``I was so attracted to Marxism, I even expressed my wish to become a Communist Party member'', citing his favorite concepts of self-sufficiency and equal distribution of wealth. 
He does not believe that China implemented ``true Marxist policy'', and thinks the historical communist states such as the Soviet Union ``were far more concerned with their narrow national interests than with the Workers' International''. 
Moreover, he believes one flaw of historically ``Marxist regimes'' is that they place too much emphasis on destroying the ruling class, and not enough on compassion. 
Despite this, he finds Marxism superior to capitalism, believing the latter is only concerned with ``how to make profits'', whereas the former has ``moral ethics''. 
Stating in 1993: The Dalai Lama is outspoken in his concerns about environmental problems, frequently giving public talks on themes related to the environment. 
He has pointed out that many rivers in Asia originate in Tibet, and that the melting of Himalayan glaciers could affect the countries in which the rivers flow. 
He acknowledged official Chinese laws against deforestation in Tibet, but lamented they can be ignored due to possible corruption. 
He was quoted as saying ``ecology should be part of our daily life''; personally, he takes showers instead of baths, and turns lights off when he leaves a room. 
Around 2005, he started campaigning for wildlife conservation, including by issuing a religious ruling against wearing tiger and leopard skins as garments. 
The Dalai Lama supports the anti-whaling position in the whaling controversy, but has criticized the activities of groups such as the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society which carries out acts of what it calls aggressive non-violence against property. 
Before the 2009 United Nations Climate Change Conference, he urged national leaders to put aside domestic concerns and take collective action against climate change. 
A monk since childhood, the Dalai Lama has said that sex offers fleeting satisfaction and leads to trouble later, while chastity offers a better life and ``more independence, more freedom''. 
He has observed that problems arising from conjugal life sometimes even lead to suicide or murder. 
He has asserted that all religions have the same view about adultery. 
In his discussions of the traditional Buddhist view on appropriate sexual behavior, he explains the concept of ``right organ in the right object at the right time,'' which historically has been interpreted as indicating that oral, manual and anal sex both homosexual and heterosexualare not appropriate in Buddhism or for Buddhists, yet he also says that in modern times all common, consensual sexual practices that do not cause harm to others are ethically acceptable and that society should not discriminate against gays and lesbians and should accept and respect them from a secular point of view. 
In a 1994 interview with ``OUT Magazine'', the Dalai Lama clarified his personal opinion on the matter by saying, ``If someone comes to me and asks whether homosexuality is okay or not, I will ask `What is your companion's opinion?' 
If you both agree, then I think I would say, `If two males or two females voluntarily agree to have mutual satisfaction without further implication of harming others, then it is okay.''' 
However, when interviewed by Canadian TV news anchor Evan Solomon on about whether or not homosexuality is acceptable in Buddhism, the Dalai Lama responded that ``it is sexual misconduct''. 
This was an echo of an earlier response in a 2004 Vancouver Sun interview when asked about homosexuality in Buddhism, where the Dalai Lama replied ``for a Buddhist, the same sex, that is sexual misconduct.'' 
In his 1996 book ``Beyond Dogma'', he described a traditional Buddhist definition of an appropriate sexual act as follows: ``A sexual act is deemed proper when the couples use the organs intended for sexual intercourse and nothing else... Homosexuality, whether it is between men or between women, is not improper in itself. 
What is improper is the use of organs already defined as inappropriate for sexual contact.'' 
He elaborated in 1997, explaining that the basis of that teaching was unknown to him. 
He also conveyed his own ``willingness to consider the possibility that some of the teachings may be specific to a particular cultural and historic context''. 
The Dalai Lama has expressed concern at ``reports of violence and discrimination against gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people'' and ``urges respect, tolerance and the full recognition of human rights for all.'' 
On gender equality and sexism, the Dalai Lama proclaimed at the National Civil Rights Museum in Memphis, Tennessee, in 2009: ``I call myself a feminist. 
Isn't that what you call someone who fights for women's rights?'' 
He also said that by nature, women are more compassionate ``based on their biology and ability to nurture and birth children.'' 
He called on women to ``lead and create a more compassionate world,'' citing the good works of nurses and mothers. 
In April 2013, at the ``Culture of Compassion'' event in Ebrington Square in Derry, Northern Ireland, the Dalai Lama asserted, stressing the importance of peace of mind: ``Warm-heartedness is a key factor for healthy individuals, healthy families and healthy communities...Scientists say that a healthy mind is a major factor for a healthy body. 
If you're serious about your health, think and take most concern for your peace of mind. 
That's very, very important.'' 
On 29 May 2011, the Dalai Lama retired from the Central Tibetan Administration. 
On 24 September 2011, the Dalai Lama issued the following statement concerning his reincarnation: When I am about ninety I will consult the high Lamas of the Tibetan Buddhist traditions, the Tibetan public, and other concerned people who follow Tibetan Buddhism, and re-evaluate whether the institution of the Dalai Lama should continue or not. 
On that basis we will take a decision. 
If it is decided that the reincarnation of the Dalai Lama should continue and there is a need for the Fifteenth Dalai Lama to be recognized, responsibility for doing so will primarily rest on the concerned officers of the Dalai Lama's Gaden Phodrang Trust. 
They should consult the various heads of the Tibetan Buddhist traditions and the reliable oath-bound Dharma Protectors who are linked inseparably to the lineage of the Dalai Lamas. 
They should seek advice and direction from these concerned beings and carry out the procedures of search and recognition in accordance with past tradition. 
I shall leave clear written instructions about this. 
Bear in mind that, apart from the reincarnation recognized through such legitimate methods, no recognition or acceptance should be given to a candidate chosen for political ends by anyone, including those in the People's Republic of China. 
On 3 October 2011, the Dalai Lama repeated his statement in an interview with Canadian CTV News. 
He added that Chinese laws banning the selection of successors based on reincarnation will not impact his decisions. 
``Naturally my next life is entirely up to me. 
No one else. 
And also this is not a political matter,'' he said in the interview. 
The Dalai Lama also added that he was not decided on whether he would reincarnate or if he would be the last Dalai Lama. 
In an interview with the German newspaper ``Welt am Sonntag'' published on 7 September 2014 the Dalai Lama stated ``the institution of the Dalai Lama has served its purpose'', and that ``We had a Dalai Lama for almost five centuries. 
The 14th Dalai Lama now is very popular. 
Let us then finish with a popular Dalai Lama.'' 
In response the Chinese government said they would select their own Dalai Lama regardless of his decision. 
The Dorje Shugden Controversy re-appeared in the Gelug school by the publication of the ``Yellow Book'' in 1976, containing stories about wrathful acts of ``Dorje Shugden'' against Gelugpas who also practiced Nyingma teachings. 
In response, the 14th Dalai Lama, a Gelugpa himself and advocate of an ``inclusive'' approach to the teachings of Tibetan Buddhism, started to speak out against the practice of Dorje Shugden in 1978. 
The controversy has attracted attention in the West because of demonstrations held in 2008 and 2014 by ``Dorje Shugden'' practitioners, especially Kelsang Gyatso's New Kadampa Tradition which broke away from the Gelugpa school in 1991. 
In October 1998, the Dalai Lama's administration acknowledged that it received $1.7 million a year in the 1960s from the U.S. government through the Central Intelligence Agency CIA. 
When asked by CIA officer John Kenneth Knaus in 1995 to comment on the CIA Tibetan program, the Dalai Lama replied that though it helped the morale of those resisting the Chinese, ``thousands of lives were lost in the resistance'' and further, that ``the U.S. Government had involved itself in his country's affairs not to help Tibet but only as a Cold War tactic to challenge the Chinese.'' 
In his autobiography ``Freedom in Exile'', the Dalai Lama criticized the CIA again for supporting the Tibetan independence movement ``not because they the CIAcared about Tibetan independence, but as part of their worldwide efforts to destabilize all communist governments''. 
In 1999, the Dalai Lama said that the CIA Tibetan program had been harmful for Tibet because it was primarily aimed at serving American interests, and ``once the American policy toward China changed, they stopped their help''. 
The Chinese press has criticized the Dalai Lama for his close ties with India. 
His 2010 remarks at the International Buddhist Conference in Gujarat saying that he was ``Tibetan in appearance, but an Indian in spirituality'' and referral to himself as a ``son of India'' in particular led the ``People's Daily'' to opine, ``Since the Dalai Lama deems himself an Indian rather than Chinese, then why is he entitled to represent the voice of the Tibetan people?'' 
Dhundup Gyalpo of the ``Tibet Sun'' shot back that Tibetan religion could be traced back to Nalanda in India, and that Tibetans have no connection to Chinese ``apart... from a handful of culinary dishes''. 
The People's Daily stressed the links between Chinese Buddhism and Tibetan Buddhism and accused the Dalai Lama of ``betraying southern Tibet to India''. 
Two years earlier in 2008, the Dalai Lama said for the first time that the territory India claims as part of Arunachal Pradesh is part of India, citing the disputed 1914 Simla Accord. 
The Dalai Lama's appeal is variously ascribed to his charismatic personality, international fascination with Buddhism, his universalist values, international sympathy for the Tibetans, and western sinophobia. 
In the 1990s, many films were released by the American film industry about Tibet, including biopics of the Dalai Lama. 
This is attributed to both the Dalai Lama's 1989 Nobel Peace Prize as well as to the euphoria following the Fall of Communism. 
The most notable films, ``Kundun'' and ``Seven Years in Tibet'' both released in 1997, portrayed ``an idyllic pre-1950 Tibet, with a smiling, soft-spoken Dalai Lama at the helm -- a Dalai Lama sworn to non-violence'': portrayals the Chinese government decried as ahistorical. 
One South African official publicly criticised the Dalai Lama's politics and lamented a taboo on criticism of him, saying ``To say anything against the Dalai Lama is, in some quarters, equivalent to trying to shoot Bambi''. 
Critics of the news and entertainment media coverage of the controversy charge that feudal Tibet was not as benevolent as popularly portrayed. 
The penal code before 1913 included forms of judicial mutilation and capital punishment to enforce a social system controversially described as both slavery and serfdom. 
In response, the Dalai Lama agreed many of old Tibet's practices needed reform. 
His predecessor had banned extreme punishments and the death penalty. 
And he had started some reforms like removal of debt inheritance during the early years of his government under the People's Republic of China in 1951. 
The Dalai Lama has his own pages on Twitter, Facebook, Instagram and Google Plus. 
The Dalai Lama has tried to mobilize international support for Tibetan's activities. 
The Dalai Lama has been successful in gaining Western support for himself and the cause of greater Tibetan autonomy or independence, including vocal support from numerous Hollywood celebrities, most notably the actors Richard Gere and Steven Seagal, as well as lawmakers from several major countries. 
He has been depicted as a character in various other movies and television programs including: The Dalai Lama has received numerous awards over his spiritual and political career. 
In 1959, he received the Ramon Magsaysay Award for Community Leadership. 
After the Tiananmen Square protests of 1989, the Norwegian Nobel Committee awarded the Dalai Lama the 1989 Nobel Peace Prize. 
The Committee officially gave the prize to the Dalai Lama for ``the struggle of the liberation of Tibet and the efforts for a peaceful resolution'' and ``in part a tribute to the memory of Mahatma Gandhi'' although the President of the Committee also said that the prize was intended to put pressure on China, which was reportedly infuriated that the award was given to a separatist. 
On 28 May 2005, the Dalai Lama received the Christmas Humphreys Award from the Buddhist Society in the United Kingdom. 
On 22 June 2006, he became one of only six people ever to be recognised with Honorary Citizenship by the Governor General of Canada. 
The Dalai Lama was a 2007 recipient of the Congressional Gold Medal, the highest civilian award bestowed by American lawmakers. 
In 2012, the Dalai Lama was awarded the Templeton Prize. 
He later donated the entire prize money to an Indian charity, ``Save the Children''. 
The Dalai Lama is an advocate for a world free of nuclear weapons, and currently serves on the Advisory Council of the Nuclear Age Peace Foundation.
